<HEADLINE>
A Thai Post Mortem
<P>
CAMBRIDGE: There are lessons from Thailand’s currency debacle beyond the sheer fun of pointing fingers.
For how can a country reach meltdown proportions when, only a few months back, barely a problem existed.
And if “tiger economy” Thailand can get into big trouble, woe to Latin America and some postcommunist countries.
<P>
[html1]
<P>
Thailand’s problem, like Mexico a few years ago, was its vulnerability, meaning that if one thing in the economy goes wrong, suddenly many things go wrong.
The cause of Thailand’s crisis was the combination of a shaky banking system (made shakier by the dollar debts of its clients), a large, short-dated foreign debt with the resulting risk of a funding crisis, and a total lack of transparency coupled with a pervasive overlay of corruption.
In Thailand, almost every politician or official had his hands in the pocket of some bank or business; every bank had officials in its pockets, too.
<P>
The Bank of Thailand could not raise interest rates to support external financing without worsening the loan problems of Thai banks, nor reduce interest rates without risking an external funding crisis.
The central bank might have cleaned up the banking system long ago, ensured the covering by assets of external dollar debts and shifted to a band-basket-crawl (BBC) exchange rate regime.
But with too much macho, too much politics and provincialism, reform never happened.
So the idea that “this country is different,” that the rules of global finance did not apply, proved utter nonsense.
By the time crisis came, Thailand looked like all the others who turn in desperation to the IMF.
<P>
Thailand’s decision last May to cut interest rates made it a safe gamble to bet against the Bhat, the opening salvo in the crisis.
Encouraged by the illusion of a strong reserve position, the Thai central bank took on the speculators -- and lost.
Capital controls added a new wrinkle, but not enough to change the outcome.
Had such controls served as a bridge to an immediate, substantial IMF program and financial sector clean-up, all might have been well.
But the window provided by controls was used for nothing; their very unsustainability exacerbated the meltdown.
<P>
Among the insights gained from this crisis are:
<P>
1.
Denial causes trouble - A problem -- for example, a weak banking system -- is left unattended.
When something big happens-- say, a devaluation that is perceived as too small -- in no time at all what’s good about a country is forgotten.
Markets treat it like a pariah; meltdown occurs; capital flees.
Every problem must be set right before a single penny comes back.
<P>
2.
Avoid vulnerability - Good macroeconomic management does not try to get the maximum out of an economy: it avoids using the real exchange rate to achieve disinflation, avoids getting foreign capital on absurdly short maturity, avoids drawing lines in the sand over exchange rates.
It keeps room for interest rates to be raised, avoids large deficits and high private foreign debt, and does not gamble the reserves away.
Good macro-management leaves room on every front and offers plenty of transparency so that investors everywhere understand that policy can respond to emerging difficulties.
As a result that country, like Chile today, is so dull that speculators won’t waste time on it.
<P>
3.
You never know how deep the puddle is - Few lenders and policy makers look at the size and maturity of external debts.
The key question is whether there are billions in debt that suddenly risk default.
<P>
4.
Who lends? - A financial problem becomes frantic only if the situation is highly leveraged.
Massive movements in exchange rates and asset prices are impossible unless a country has both a large current account deficit and large and liquid liabilities.
Who is on the other side of a loan matters, too.
In Thailand’s case: Japanese banks.
They need to make money but have no idea about risk, as demonstrated by the fact that they loaned money to every losing proposition of the past 15 years.
So lenders and bank supervisors deserve part of the blame.
<P>
5.
Don’t fight, float - Central banks cannot fight speculators, even by using capital controls.
Central banks cannot keep high interest rates forever, as they lack unlimited reserves and political breathing room.
In the end, they will surrender and that encourages speculators.
This is even more true when, as in the case of Thailand, the currency can go only down.
If there is a chance of a bigger meltdown because reserves are depleted and a vast external debt might not be rolled over, defending the currency risks an even greater meltdown as more speculators join the fray.
<P>
6.
Stalling costs - After ministers proclaim for months that nothing is wrong and nothing will be done, devaluations of 10% or 15% only invite speculators to kick at the door to see if more devaluation is possible.
So float the currency even if that is bad for inflation.
<P>
7.
Policymakers are more stupid (stubborn) than you think - They persist in their mistakes.
Misconceptions linger; they deny reality; they seek vindication by defending the currency.
Only when the system reaches for orthodoxy do necessary structural changes occur.
The people who screw up are rarely the ones that preside over the work out and upturn.
<P>
8.
The IMF dithers - After Mexico’s collapse, talk about “crisis avoidance” and “enhanced surveillance” yielded only that, talk.
The IMF knew about Thailand’s problems but did not publicize its misgivings.
Don’t blame the IMF: hospitals don’t force patients into care.
They wait for them to come to the emergency room.
<P>
9.
In every crisis some myth dies - In Thailand the myth that Asian economies are different evaporated.
So too the idea that deficits are okay when they reflect investment, or that large borrowing is no problem if it is private.
Anytime a myth shatters, the computer screens of global traders search for parallel cases.
Today’s Asian contagion is of that kind, but is overdone in the cases of Malaysia and Indonesia, though not of the Philippines.
In Latin America, Brazil and Argentina stand in the firing line.
<P>
Waiting for the Fund - Once a currency gets seriously under attack a meltdown will continue until the full IMF treatment (tight budgets, convertible currencies, bank reform) is applied.
When the IMF team arrives there is always a difficult moment -- domestic politics won’t allow this or that change.
Only when the IMF program is accepted will the currency stabilize, and stock markets pick up.
So governments should stop jawing and take their medicine.
The only question is how much financial devastation happens as politicians dither.
