<HEADLINE>
After Solidarity: Democracy or Liberalism?
<P>
WARSAW: The shipyard of Gdansk, birthplace of Solidarity and cradle of the revolution against communism, is poised to go into bankruptcy.
That a Solidarity-led government may take such a step is proof, if any is needed, that Poland has traveled far.
Deep questions about the nature of our political system, however, remain to be answered.
<P>
Nearly a decade after communism’s collapse, Poland has no doubt achieved a quite liberal society.
No doubt, that is, if one assumes that defense of the "negative" freedoms enjoyed by individuals and groups is the main purpose of a liberal society.
Everybody is nowadays for or against something; everyday many people - often successfully - organize protests to thwart the aspirations of someone or other, or to negate some state decision.
From big issues - say, the closure of the Gdansk shipyards - to small ones - say, when the peasants in my village object to a new road because the tumult may kill their pigs - the country is awash in impromptu protest politics.
<P>
Every particular protest has its understandable, even justifiable, cause, and it is obvious that people should defend their interests.
But the general attitude in Poland is not, to borrow a phrase from Martin Luther King Jr, one of "we shall overcome."
It is, instead, one of "we shall not allow."
<P>
This is civil society built, not on solidarity, but on negation.
Protests against the decisions of the post-communist authorities, who were ousted in elections last year, at least had the appearance of some principled political motivation: we were against them and feared an attempted restoration.
Now we have "our" government, but also our own "refuseniks," and they appear even stronger and their obstructions more strident than before.
<P>
Why is this so?
I have a simple answer.
Polish society (like many societies, in this part of the world, but also in the West) accepts and enjoys liberal freedoms without being really interested in democracy, at least in the true meaning of that word.
What is that true meaning?
From its origins in ancient Greece democracy has meant self-government.
It demands a high degree of disciplined republican participation and a belief in the possibility of personal fulfillment and excellence in the public sphere.
<P>
But few people today want to be bothered by the tawdriness of political life.
When politics appears as nothing more than a nuisance or a bore, a kind of social nihilism becomes acceptable, even comfortable, to practically everyone in so-called democratic and liberal societies.
<P>
Those who fought for democracy - whether here or in the West - believed they had a purpose.
"We the people" wanted to rule ourselves, not to be ruled.
That was the core democratic intention.
Of course we also wanted to be free, to enjoy and pursue our private freedoms, desires which Benjamin Constant taught us are particular to modern men and women.
Many critics in Constant’s day, indeed, accused him of exalting liberal values over democratic ones, but those early 19th century criticisms were premature.
In a sad irony they seem to have been proven right only recently, when democracy’s greatest triumph, the defeat of totalitarian communism, also ushered in a world of deracinated commitments.
<P>
Sacrificing democratic virtues in pursuit of liberal independence/indulgence is perhaps not very dangerous in counties where civil society is deeply rooted and self-government strong and stable.
But in the so called "new democracies" of the postcommunist world, the domination of the "liberal" over the "democratic," the domination of the individual over the community, the domination of protest over construction may soon reveal that these countries are not pre-democratic, as it is often said, but perhaps post-democratic.
<P>
Democracy as understood by our forefathers is not desired by most people here.
A liberal society with effective economic governance is all people want and, perhaps, all they need.
But can a viable liberal society exist without real democratic rule?
I think not.
<P>
A fine-tuned, if precarious, balance of liberal and democratic factors allowed for the last fifty years of unprecedented well-being in the West.
Individual freedoms, human rights and the spirit of anti-collectivism developed as never before, but there was also a burgeoning welfare state, Christian and social democratic parties that understood how strongly prosperity and individual freedoms depend on community.
Our "post-democratic" folk do not believe in the spirit of community; they fear it, not without reason, as tainted by the legacy of collectivism, and therefore riven with totalitarian tendencies.
Let those in the "rich and rotten" West exalt community, some people sneer, we cannot permit ourselves to think in similar ways in our "unspoiled" new democracies.
<P>
By leaving the rhetoric of "community" only to the extremes of right and left, by abandoning it to people with nothing positive to say, people who loath all aspects of liberal individualism, both liberalism and democracy are placed at risk.
Freedom and protest against any oppression must be defended, but both defenders and aggressors must agree about some common political will.
Without such a basic democratic foundation, our rampant individualisms will deliver us, in time, to a more civilized form of that pre-social situation, once described by Thomas Hobbes, in which everyone is free and a man is a wolf to every other man.
