<HEADLINE>
Apres Mitterand
<P>
PARIS: Asked at 19 what he would like to be, Francois Mitterrand answered "all, or nothing".
Through his life he kept to these words.
Upon escaping from a WWII prison camp, he started to climb, first in Vichy, then in the Resistance, the ladder which was to bring him in 1981, and for fourteen years, to the head of the State.
<P>
Since the beginning of the 5th Republic, the Right took it for granted that it would stay long in power for the simple reason that the division of the Left between the communists and socialists was too deep to be overcome.
But Mitterrand managed to convince the leadership of the two parties that, since it was the only way to win, their alliance was not only necessary but feasible.
George Marchais, boss of the powerful communist party at the time, assumed the communists would play a predominant role in a victory of the Left.
Almost everybody in the conservative ranks shared that view, but Moscow, always distrustful of the social-democrats, made it clear that it didn't approve of the rapprochement.
<P>
Finally the balance turned in Mitterrand's favor.
The communists lost much ground to their partners and rivals in the 1981 elections and had to satisfy themselves with four minor portfolios in the new cabinet.
A few days later, Mitterrand was telling George Bush, then vice-president, that he asked the communists to join his government essentially to prevent them from opposing necessary unpopular measures he would take.
And, he correctly predicted that in less than three years they would understand that participation in the government was ruining their image and would withdraw their ministers.
<P>
The Right, which despised him, predicted that Mitterrand would be booed out of office.
Alain Juppe, at the time, commented that Mitterrand would leave public life in rags and tatters.
The courage and dignity the late President consistently showed during his long fight with cancer helped to change the climate.
The Prime Minister was not the only politician of the Right to pay his tribute to Mitterrand.
The most significant gesture was Chirac's recent TV speech, in which he choose to inscribe his old rival in the continuity of the Nation's history.
None of his public statements, it is certain, since his election last June had such an impact in France.
<P>
Chirac was right.
Far from destroying the regime and the society which supported it, as he threatened to do, did not the late President, willingly or not, consolidate them?
Mitterrand fiercely campaigned against the constitution, which he equated in his most famous book to a "permanent coup"; he then preceded to make use of all the powers it gave him.
He was a dedicated opponent of the national deterrent; yet, more tests took place during his two terms than under de Gaulle.
After two years of nationalizations and of Keynesian exercises which led to three devaluations, he opted for a very tight monetary policy.
After a brief period of open crisis, he put an end to the leftist prejudice against private schools.
<P>
In spite of his hesitations before the reunification of Germany, Helmut Kohl, who could be seen weeping at his funeral, had no better friend: he forgot neither the support received from him during the euromissiles crisis nor their common struggle for Maastricht's Europe.
And it was fundamentally to stick to the old Gaullist idea of the nation's "rank" that Mitterrand engaged the French army into the Gulf War.
<P>
It is, to a large degree, due to this "conversion" that Chirac has been free to respond with some not altogether Gaullist moves, such as support of the European single currency, a partial reentry into Nato, and a pledge to give up nuclear tests forever, once the present series is over.
Is that to say that Mitterrand's death has reconciled the French on the basis of their common values?
<P>
It would be fairer to say that they realized, in spite of his mistakes - among them the way in which he hurriedly, in August 1991, behaved as if the coup in Moscow had succeeded, the links he kept with friends implicated in corruption affairs, and his collaboration with the Nazis - that they had lost one of the outstanding figures of this century, a true father figure of the nation (something needed most in this period where persisting economic gloom and the plague of unemployment extended itself even to Germany.)
Unfortunately they hardly see presently on the political stage a character of the same size.
