<HEADLINE>
China's Dot.Communist Economy
<P>
BEIJING: New Economy euphoria is gripping China.
Cell phones seem as ubiquitous in Shanghai as in Helsinki, with dot com firms as common as in San Francisco.
Although the term “irrational exuberance,” once applied by America’s central banker Alan Greenspan to the US stock market, does not apply here, the rush into New Economy investments, with even the prospect of a Chinese NASDAQ in the offing, has rejuvenated China’s economy.
As China embraces the new, however, its old industries are coming under enormous pressure.
<P>
Coming just a few years after Asia’s financial panic, China’s euphoria is surprising.
The government seems to be embracing the New Economy as a means to immunize China against future crisis.
This is wishful thinking.
No one should expect that a single crisis can burn away all of a country’s economic weeds, nor that the New Economy is a magic bullet for risk-free growth.
<P>
Over the past two centuries the developed world experienced periodic booms and busts on its way to prosperity.
Those crises purged economies and societies of inefficiencies and helped improve their core institutions.
The miracle of East-Asia (including China) over the past 30-40 years was not high growth alone but the fact that robust long term growth came about without inciting any major crisis.
Asia’s financial panic of 1997-1999 was a first for the region - which is why it stunned everyone - but it won’t be the last.
Despite all the hype, the New Economy cannot vaccinate a country from tumult.
<P>
So, in the wake of New Economy euphoria, are China’s technological ambitions and current growth rates sustainable?
Like some other Asian economies, China saw strong growth in the first half of 2000.
GDP grew by 8.2%, higher than last year’s 7.4% for the same period.
Moreover, three years of price deflation - which began during the financial crisis of 1997 - may be at an end.
As in America at the beginning of its boom, however, the key to continuing growth is sustained investment and improved productivity.
<P>
Investment in China has been growing steadily since the beginning of this year.
Even more hopeful is the fact that private (non-governmental) investment has recovered from last years’ decline to a moderate 6.7% growth in real term.
This growth is the first improvement in the investment climate for 3 years.
<P>
Although the New Economy is sometimes credited with these improvements, the real causes are more prosaic, which is why today’s momentum can be maintained.
Real structural adjustment occurred over the past 3-4 years: 16 millions state workers and 11 million others were laid off in urban and rural industries.
Many enterprises were closed, not only small State owned enterprises (SOEs), but also countless private and semi-private companies that were even more vulnerable than the SOEs to an economic slow-down.
Manufacturing capacity has been slashed in some industries, making room for new investment.
If private investment continues at its present pace, the government may be able to shelve its plans to stimulate investment through large-scale debt-financing, which will help sustain growth over the long run.
<P>
Increased domestic consumption is also pushing China’s economy ahead.
Although the retail price index remains negative, retail sales increased 13.8% in the second quarter.
The most notable trend is an escalating demand for housing.
Reform of housing laws, the opening of a secondary housing market, and in particular, the rapid expansion in the use of home mortgages are the main forces behind this growth.
This trend will likely continue to play a big role over the next decade as China’s 200million strong middle class sets out to become real property owners.
<P>
Beyond housing, exports and imports grew powerfully, by 38.3% and 36.2% respectively so far this year, thanks to expansion in the world economy and Asia’s recovery.
Not too much weight should be given to this, however, as exports only contributed 0.3% to GDP growth.
Entry by China into the WTO may temporarily boost exports, but the dismantling of China’s own trade barriers will increase imports quickly.
This means that China’s domestic market must become the focus of policymaking for growth.
<P>
As a developing country with a per capita GDP of $800, sharing similarities with other South-East Asian economies and (at the same time!) a “transition economy” bearing the burden of central planning, China’s domestic economy is a place riddled with economic, institutional, structural, and political problems.
Because China is saddled with both transition and developing country difficulties, finding solutions for these problems is more demanding here than in societies that are either purely transitional or developing.
This is another reason why Chinese policymakers must not jump on the New Economy bandwagon as an attempt to leap magically out of their problems into some utopian future.
China has seen enough experimentation over the last half-century to know that when you attempt a great leap forward you land flat on your face.
<P>
For China, today’s increasing growth rates are sustainable if China continues to open its economy to competition with the world while ruthlessly excising the legacy of socialist industrialization.
If such policies are pursued, Chinese growth may remain in the range of 7.5- 8%, with low inflation continuing for the foreseeable future.
It is only by keeping its eyes on its untrendy old economy that China’s New Economy ambitions make any sense.
