<HEADLINE>
Chirac And The General's Legacy
<P>
PARIS: It takes a Gaullist president to undermine the foreign policies France has pursued ever since the presidency of General Charles de Gaulle.
Of course, this is not an out-and-out insubordination from de Gaulle's world and European vision.
But in many ways President Jacques Chirac is distancing himself from his hero's foreign policy ideas and structures.
<P>
Even though the post-ideological and nationalist tenor of today's global politics appear to confirm many of the things General de Gaulle prophesied in the 1960s, the world nowadays is sufficiently different from the one in which he lived that it is hard to say with certainty how the General would react to current events.
Yes, the General treated Franco-German reconciliation as of primary importance in building a new and secure Europe.
So in this respect, President Chirac is following in de Gaulle's footsteps.
But it is hard to believe that the General would have approved of the scheme for a single European currency which Chirac openly supports.
<P>
That surrender of national sovereignty, indeed, seems very different from the heart of de Gaulle's grand vision for France.
Moreover, the veto that the General wielded powerfully to protect French interests in Europe (remember his famous "NON" to British membership in the early 1960s) also seems to be something President Chirac is willing to sacrifice.
<P>
Last year's brazenly chauvinistic resumption of nuclear tests in the Pacific in the face of international opposition was certainly vintage Gaullism.
But in other areas of national security, President Chirac is distinctly un-Gaullist.
Consider his announcement, after the completion of the nuclear tests, that France was willing to give up such measures "for ever."
Consider his talk about "concerted deterrence," and of the "europeanization of defense."
Even if one is skeptical about the feasibility of both notions, the impulse behind them is a long way away from the independent security posture for France that de Gaulle cultivated.
Certainly the advent of an all-volunteer French army appears to thwart the General's notion of inculcating national esprit and grandeur.
<P>
Most important of all these changes is French re-entry into NATO.
In a way, this turnabout is a logical and probably unavoidable consequence of Franco-American cooperation in working to resolve the war in Bosnia.
Once it was decided last year, with Chirac's complete agreement, to launch air strikes against military targets near the Bosnian Serb capital of Pale, there was no alternative to NATO's involvement in Bosnia and therefore to French cooperation with NATO's political and military organs.
Given the frigid relations de Gaulle had for years with America, Chirac's cheerful visit to Washington last February emphasized this tilt even more.
It was as if old friends were meeting again.
<P>
This does not mean that the French army is about to be placed under NATO's unified command structure, which de Gaulle abandoned thirty years ago.
Nor does it mean that American troops, which left France at that time, will ever return to French soil.
Nor does increased Franco-American cooperation mean that all disputes are at an end.
Cultural, linguistic, trade disputes will certainly continue.
And as France continues to assert its powerful role in Africa, and establish a role for itself (and the EU) in Asia, unsuspected frictions with America will likely bubble up.
But this increased cooperation does mean that France and America are at least willing to talk about the structures of security Europe needs in the wake of the continent's reunification.
<P>
Where Chirac is likely to remain most Gaullist is in areas that, today, appear to have a common interest throughout the West.
General de Gaulle was famous for carving out a policy toward the Soviet Union distinct from that pursued by the United States.
Chirac has embarked on his own Russia policy, but so far it appears to travel on parallel lines with standard European and American policies toward Russia.
<P>
Like Germany's Chancellor Kohl, indeed, Chirac is very much afraid about what sort of Russia will emerge from its presidential elections this coming June.
Like Kohl, he is also eager to do everything within reason to help Boris Yeltsin win that vote -- despite Chechnya, despite Russia's crime, corruption, and chaos.
Five years ago, western governments played (and failed at) the same game in support of Mikhail Gorbachev and against Yeltsin.
Whether Russian voters will appreciate a repeat performance appears to be a question President Chirac is not asking.
<P>
These policies toward Russia, in turn, make Chirac (as well as leaders throughout the western alliance) increasingly cautious about NATO and EU expansion.
Both Kohl and Chirac would like to find a means to placate Russian fears of encirclement, and appear unlikely to move either item along until that rabbit can be pulled out of the diplomatic hat.
<P>
Although domestic political issues were what brought Jacques Chirac to the French presidency, no Gaullist president could have been expected to stand on the sidelines of international affairs.
That Chirac has insulated his foreign policies from the domestic troubles that have dogged his first year in office is one of the triumphs of his still young presidency.
His calm retreat from some of the more isolating notions practiced by General de Gaulle, and his ability to have these policies accepted by most rank-and-file Gaullists, speak of self-disciplined ambitions, and a maturing Gaullism for the next century.
