<HEADLINE>
Commonwealth Or Empire?
<P>
Russia’s attack on the Chechen nation surprised those who thought that the Russian Federation had become a liberal democracy.
The Russian bombing and shelling of Grozny and the gradual slide of Russia away from market democracy, however, fit a pattern which has been developing in the past two years.
To understand the road to Grozny, it is important to realize how Russia’s foreign policy has evolved.
<P>
Immediately after the breakup of the USSR, Russia’s leadership seemed to accept the liberation of former soviet republic from Moscow’s orbit.
In fact, the dissolution of the USSR would not have taken place had Russia not led the way in its abolition.
Whereas the Central Asian republics’ rulers wished to keep the Soviet structure, it was Yeltsin and the Russian government which wanted to put an end to the Soviet Union and create an independent Russian Federation.
<P>
Since 1993, however, there has been a Russian switch to imperialism in the “near abroad”.
The decisive moment was Russia’s move to join the fighting in the Tajik civil war.
By proclaiming that Tajikistan’s border (with Afghanistan) was Russia’s, Moscow denied Tajikistan’s sovereignty.
Moreover, since there are several Central Asian republics between Tajikistan and Russia, the Kremlin was really implying that all of Central Asia was still Russian territory.
In Georgia, Russia provided military support to Abkhazian opponents of the Tbilisi authorities and coerced Georgia into the CIS.
Russian operatives also involved themselves deeply into Georgia’s many political and ethnic conflicts, striving to weaken the Georgian state as much as possible.
In other republics through agreements on border guards, training, and military facilities, Moscow has kept control of security-related affairs and so made a mockery of their independence.
In industrial affairs, Russia has grabbed stakes in Kazakhstani and Azerbaijani oil developments.
Moreover, Russia has pressed these countries to rely on Russian pipelines to export their commodities, giving the Kremlin a veto over their petroleum exports.
<P>
In Chechnya, we are seeing the tactics Russia has developed against the newly independent states utilized against a republic of the Russian Federation.
The attempt to manipulate rival factions, and the use of military power to achieve Moscow’s aims, are familiar to the Tajiks and the Georgians.
The difference is that Chechnya is within the Russian Federation, whereas the “near abroad” nations are not.
The similarities, however, are more important than the differences.
In both the “near abroad” and Chechnya, Moscow has chosen to settle disputes with force and bloodshed rather than through civilized discussions and negotiations.
The definition of Russia’s true frontiers, and its relations with the former Soviet republics and the Federation’s own non-Russian regions, is obviously a complex task.
Unfortunately, Moscow is following a path which will prevent the peaceful settlement of these post-Soviet disputes.
<P>
These moves towards renewed imperialism and the resort to brute force are critical for Russia’s own internal developments.
Some observers dismiss events in Chechnya, Central Asia, and the Transcaucasus as unfortunate, but irrelevant to relations between Russia and the international community.
They point out that the leaders whom Russia has fought - in Chechnya, Tajikistan, Azerbajan, and Georgia --are men of limited democratic credentials who mismanaged their countries.
In their analysis, priority must be given to helping Russia.
<P>
What these analysts fail to discern is the relationship between Russia’s foreign policies and its internal developments.
By using force to subjugate foreign peoples, Russia is undermining its fragile democratic order for several reasons:
<P>
First, there are no liberal democratic empires.
Freedom and choice are the tenets of liberalism, hile imperialism is about ruling people by force.
It is not sustainable for the people of Smolensk oblast to live under constitutional democracy, while the citizens of Grozny and Sukhumi are the victims of wanton shelling and destruction.
The history of colonialism in western Europe and Japan, of slavery in the US, shows that as liberal democratic ideals take root in a society, the rights of citizenship cannot be denied to colonial subjects of members or certain groups.
Thus, if Russia continues along an imperialist line, its democracy will be at risk.
<P>
Second, continued imperialism in the near-abroad and in Chechnya strengthens reactionary forces who oppose liberal democracy.
The political and military elements which lament the demise of the Soviet state feed on the resources devoted to extend Russian influence in the non-Russian republics.
In the former republics, the politicins who favor strong ties to Russia are also those who favor a return to old Soviet ways and thus the forces behind stronger intra-CIS ties are not those of liberals interested in European Union-type arrangements, but lobbies who loath markets and pluralism and wish to restore planning, conformity, indeed all the old Soviet ways.
<P>
Third, imperialism is costly.
Fighting in Tajikistan and the Caucasus costs money, creating a financial burden Russia can ill afford.
The impact on the budget costs of these colonial wars will futher incite Russia’s financial decay and frighten foreign investors.
<P>
Thus Russia’s future is intimately tied to its policies in the non-Russian republics.
Russians soldiers in Grozny, Sukhumi, and Dushanbe are not only fighting the indigenous peoples of Russia’s periphery.
They are digging the graves of Russia’s prosperity and democracy.
The victory of Russian imperialism would ensure that Russia becomes a despotic third world empire rather than a prosperous, liberal commonwealth.
