<HEADLINE>
Culture And Diplomacy
<P>
HAMBURG: In a world without a compass, few slogans enjoy as much popularity as the "Clash of Civilizations", promoted by Harvard professor Samual Huntington.
<P>
At first glance, Huntington's thesis appeals: conflicts of the future, he predicts, will no longer be waged between hostile ideologies but between antagonistic civilizations.
Men will battle for their beliefs, cultural and religious identity; conflicts will occur on the fault lines between civilizations, particularly between Chinese, Islamic, and Western civilizations.
His nightmarish scenario: a coalition between China and Islam forms against the West, and a nuclear warhead, transported by a Chinese-Iranian missile, is fired from Algeria into France.
Of course, Huntington points out such scenarios need not become real.
But he warns of their increasing likelihood.
<P>
For those seeking a coherent theory for future crisis, the "Clash of Civilizations" is tempting.
Are we not witnessing -- around Africa's great lakes, in the Balkans, the Gulf and Central Asia -- ethnic frictions and religious fervor bringing fire and destruction on enemies?
Is it not true that values which the West believed universal are rejected as unfit by Asia's confident new leaders?
Are these same values not derided by Islamic fundamentalists in rebellion against Western modernity?
<P>
It is this unease that Huntington taps.
If his analysis were merely wrong, one could brush it aside as just another piece of academic irrelevance.
But it is dangerous because it conveys respectability to deep-rooted prejudices against other cultures and races.
Although the author of "The Clash of Civilizations" claims he wants better understanding between civilizations, he fans the flames he pretends to want to put out by preaching that conflict stems not from the barrel of a gun but from the pulpit of a creed.
<P>
Neither fact nor argument bears out his analysis.
Take the Balkan War, which Huntington sees as a foreboding of the future.
Only superficially was this a clash of civilizations.
As the last US ambassador in Belgrade, Warren Zimmermann, has pointed out, similarities rather than differences among Balkan peoples made them vulnerable to nationalist manipulation.
It took more than a decade during which politicians, so-called academics, and journalists whipped up emotions of incompatibility before people in the various republics were willing to think of separations, and it required bloody fighting before they were willing to be pushed into narrow ethnic confines.
What was remarkable was not that, in the end, most resigned themselves to segregation, but that many resisted the new divisions for so long.
The lesson of the Balkan War is not that civilizations -- catholic, orthodox, islamic -- tend to clash but that they can be manipulated by ruthless leaders through massive propaganda efforts and threats to life.
<P>
Huntington's other example also fail to support his thesis.
Like all strategists, Huntington is fascinated by China's rise.
Little doubt exists that the re-entry of the Middle Kingdom on the world stage is having great repercussions, nor that an increasing self-confident China will resist pressures to adopt Western values.
<P>
But this in no way suggests, as Huntington claims, that lack of cultural affinity between the West and China renders armed conflict more likely.
Central to his concept, he offers no proof for this claim and concedes as much by concluding lamely: "The real reason for the conflict is a fundamental disagreement (between China and the United States) over the future balance of power in Asia" -- after all the huffing and puffing no clash of civilizations but the good old great power rivalry.
<P>
This is not to say that China's re-emergence will cause no tensions, examples of which were seen in the Taiwan crisis earlier this year.
But these were felt first among regional states that are not cultural aliens but relatives of China.
Here Zimmermann's Balkan observations get closer to the truth -- similarities rather than differences breed conflict.
<P>
That it is prejudice, not reason or insight, that underpins Huntington's thesis becomes clear in his discussion of Islam, "the only civilization which has put in doubt the survival of the West, even twice."
For Huntington, the most dangerous combination is the "confucian-islamic connection", ganging up against the West and, at least in his imagination, firing nuclear missiles at Christian France.
No plausible argument is advanced about what it is in Islam that is so threatening.
In the end, Huntington muses, it probably all boils down to rapid population growth in the Islamic countries over recent decades, a process that, Huntington concedes, is waning.
<P>
So the "Clash of Civilizations" is revealed as empty sloganeering.
Yet many would like to believe what Huntington says.
At a time without roadmaps, a prophet from Harvard who claims he can provide one offers hope to those who want to escape confusion.
That is why the book must be taken seriously even if it is no serious book.
<P>
Huntington's ideas should be welcomed as a powerful reminder to beware false prophets who appeal to prejudice, not reason, and who offer a gilded path through uncertainty.
Perhaps there was a single roadmap during the Cold War, but that clarity was artificial.
Global rivalry between superpowers armed to the teeth is the stuff of computer games but, except in rare circumstances, such clarity is not the pattern of world politics.
<P>
Understandably, those who remember the Cold War's artificial clarity want to regain it.
But the new international order, if it comes, will be the result not of an overarching concept but of overarching institutions, not of a compass that guides leaders through the fog of events, but of a procedure that offers a guide-rail to hold on to in the search for common solutions.
That Huntington developed his arguments to a length of 500 pages shows how threadbare they are.
The likely areas of future conflict will be defined not by competing civilizations but by the absence of functioning international institutions.
