<HEADLINE>
Cultures of Everything and Nothing
<P>
OXFORD: In the late 1960s Yehudi Menuhin dedicated a performance of Beethoven's violin concerto to "the indomitable and defiant spirit of man."
Do we still look at the arts in that way?
To be sure, the paperback, the cd, the technical quality of art reproduction provide millions of people with entry tickets to Malraux's musee imaginaire of all culture.
But as the inhuman tenor of this century comes to condition our feelings, the terrible impotence of culture stands naked.
<P>
More than arguably, European civilization will not regain its truth or vitality until the causal implications of Christianity, of its founding doctrines and institutions thereafter, in the 20th century catastrophe, are faced up to unequivocally.
Vast lies and strategic amnesia have hollowed out the heart of Europe since 1945.
Of that emptiness may come the monstrous, witness the former Yugoslavia.
<P>
It is not, as Auden bitterly observed, that "poems make nothing happen".
It is that we now know of the neutrality of art in the company of barbarism, of the capacity of people to appreciate music, art, poetry, profoundly in the evening, and then to proceed to bestiality the next morning.
One need only listen to the pellucid wonders of Furtwangler's concerts in the 1940s or recall that it was under the Occupation that French drama -- Claudel, Sartre, Montherlant -- reached new heights, to experience the paradox.
Great art, indeed, has not only co-existed with political madness, it has adorned and celebrated it.
<P>
Personally, I cannot shake off the intuition that minds and sensibilities shaped by aesthetics, by their identification with fictions, by their enchantment with the past, may be inhibited from any active, concrete involvement in the anguish and demands of the present.
The cries of Lear may blot out those in the street outside our window; concert-going may make it impossible to hear the terror, the thirst of the victims on the way to Dachau in the Munich suburbs.
As the millennium comes to its close, the Periclean, the Renaissance, the Enlightenment identification of excellence in the arts and in their reception with political-social decency and progress looks to be dubious.
<P>
Today, despite the democratization of access to culture, is noontime not in the arts but in the sciences.
An estimated 90% of all scientists in history are now alive.
Whereas much of culture seems to be looking backward, science is, by definition, in forward motion.
Logic and statistics do not authorize the inference, but a stubborn intimation whispers to us that the coming of another Michelangelo or Shakespeare or Mozart is doubtful.
In the sciences, however, even a middling talent is on an upward escalator.
<P>
Scientific disciplines are in constant assent.
Theorems will be solved, crucial experiments performed, discoveries made next week or the week after that.
At this moment, such "ultimates" as the creation of self-replicating molecular life, the mapping of the beginning of our cosmos and the neuro-physiological understanding of consciousness, are plausible.
The dizzying concept of a "theory of everything" is no longer science fiction.
<P>
The impact on our existence and on imaginative horizons is obvious.
What is overlooked is the shift in fundamental energies and joys.
In the late 20th century, scientists harness the most concentrated, innovative impulses toward the future.
The prestige, the rewards associated with their project are, to the humanist, enviable.
But it is "joy", Nietzsche's frohliche Wissenschaft, I have in mind.
<P>
The odium that emanates from the bitter quarrels between critical schools and movements in the arts, the voluminous triviality of so much that is published point to a Byzantine afternoon.
As do the juggler's ingenuities of deconstruction and post-modernism.
I have seen scientists stare, as at lunacy, at the central deconstructive axiom that "there is nothing outside the text".
Doing first class science, however, is visibly enormous fun.
It engages criteria of elegance, of beauty, of harmony as old as Plato but now hidden from all who cannot master the languages, the poetry of algebra.
Here may indeed be "no country for old men", as Yeats would put it, but it is brimful of laughter and sunrise.
<P>
How is one to extend to the pure and applied sciences the techniques of presentation, of graphic intelligibility long established in the arts?
So much of the history of music, most especially in recent decades, interpenetrates with that of mathematics.
Holographic images of startling beauty are now developing in domains shared by architecture, biology, mathematics, and the arts.
The geometrical plays its deep games in Mantegna and Durer no less than in Cezanne and Cubism.
One of the disabling weaknesses of current culture is its unwillingness or inability to engage with the dance of the spirit in the sciences.
Music and the arts are equipped to do better.
<P>
The underlying issue here is that of the organic form and logic in the birth, evolution, and possible decay of human institutions.
There are mysterious concordances between historical time and the spirit of an enterprise.
Great genres in culture have their epochs, such as epic grand opera and the music hall.
There may come a moment when even the most authoritative of voices begins to be out of tune, when a revered and outwardly successful structure starts to outlive its own vision and necessity.
<P>
To know when to stop is a rare but vital mark of honesty within excellence.
Too many worn out ghosts of past or altered cultural ambitions and ideals litter today's scene.
It is precisely because the arts have secured a mass democratic audience that creative people should ask themselves if culture is representative of the energies of our age.
It is the failure of nerve implicit in not posing this question that signals stasis or even decline.
Faced candidly, this very self-questioning may generate those changes, those new hopes and fruitful errors whereby the arts are celebrated and renewed.
