<HEADLINE>
Democracy by Decree?
<P>
BUCHAREST: Romania is facing a fundamental question that many thought buried alongside Nicolae Ceausescu: Is it right to achieve just political ends by suspect or outright undemocratic means?
Today’s question is even more troublesome: Should democratic governments stick to the rules of democracy no matter the consequences?
Or can they, short of committing unconstitutional acts, take some liberties with the democratic processes in the name of honorable and necessary ends, perhaps even in the name of securing the future of democracy itself?
<P>
This question has bedeviled the postcommunist transition.
That an excessive use of presidential decrees is a favorite tool of authoritarian governments is not a matter of dispute.
We have had some recent experience of this in Romania, where the regime of ex-communists, led by former president Ion Illiescu, was often criticized by the democratic opposition and the press for relying on “rule by decree,” not parliamentary voting.
<P>
Decree power, however, has sometimes also been used to good purpose.
Russia’s Boris Yeltsin, for example, pushed through most of his political and economic reforms, including privatization, by using -- many would say abusing -- his extensive power to govern by decree.
And conversely, in other countries, such as Ukraine, legislative paralysis means that reforms never took hold or were delayed for years at the cost of a great suffering that could perhaps have been averted by a more assertive use of presidential powers.
<P>
The dilemma of decree powers is now resurrected in Romania not by Ceausescu’s postcommunist heirs, but by the democratic forces of President Emil Constantinescu and Prime Minister Viktor Ciorbea.
Romania’s 1991 constitution does not allow outright presidential decrees.
It does, however, permit the government to issue so-called “ordinances,” which have the force of law, but must be ratified by parliament within three months.
In theory, this shortcut is supposed to be used in rather loosely defined “emergency” cases.
But today, the Ciorbea cabinet claims that, due to the economic rot left behind by the Iliescu government, Romania confronts an almost permanent emergency.
<P>
Debate over the use of ordinances has raged ever since the Ciorbea government issued ordinances to change basic education and local government laws.
Some of these ordinances grant new rights to the country’s 1.7 million Hungarian minority, as promised in the Romanian-Hungarian Treaty of 1996.
Ethnic minority students in Romania may now take university entrance exams in their native tongues and the Hungarian-language Bolyai university in Cluj, closed since the late 1950s, is to be reopened.
In towns and villages with more than a 20% non-Romanian population, street signs must be multi-lingual.
<P>
Opposition parties, the press, even some government supporters were outraged.
Nationalists accused the government of selling Transylvania to Hungary and preparing to dismember the country.
Powerful national newspapers, such as Adevarul, said that the Hungarian Democratic Union, which has two ministers and several state secretaries in the Ciorbea cabinet, had blackmailed the government.
Because President Clinton, during a July visit to Bucharest, welcomed the recent changes, some in the opposition declared that the West was directing Romanian policy in almost as haughty a manner as Soviet imperial dictates of old.
<P>
But criticism came not only from the enemies of minority rights.
A number of politicians and public figures sympathetic to the idea objected to what they saw as the government’s highhandedness.
The big daily newspaper “Romania Libera” attacked the prime minister’s “strange haste to avoid Parliament.”
<P>
The theory behind parliamentary government is that parliamentary scrutiny offers the best-testing ground for government proposals, the best restraint against abuse, the best source of legitimacy and, above all, a system that can adapt flexibly to changing times.
In practice, however, parliamentary sovereignty in Romania sometimes serves these goals badly.
Parliamentary debates are often a charade; parliamentary votes an invitation to obstruction.
<P>
What is particularly missing in Romania is party discipline, which undergirds the workings of a parliamentary democracy.
When a “hot” issue like minority rights is at stake, the Ciorbea government cannot even rely on its own supporters.
Witness the current minister of the interior who declared that only Romanians are “native’ to Transylvania, since the Hungarians now living there have invaded the land a mere 1,000 years ago!
<P>
The irony, of course, is that a government, elected in large measure because of its promised fidelity to democratic principles, demonstrates even less restraint in the use of ordinances than its undemocratic predecessor.
The real obstacle to the Ciorbea cabinet’s measures in this instance, however, is an ingrained chauvinism that exists irrespective of party affiliation.
Minorities are thought of as “newcomers” and “tenants” in Romania even among many members of the country’s intellectual elite who often view themselves as kindly “landlords” prepared every once in a while to grant “concessions.”
As long as this attitude endures, any reform-minded government has little chance to mobilize enough parliamentary and public support to carry on its liberal policies toward the Hungarian minority.
Democratic means and democratic ends seem to conflict.
<P>
True democrats rightly feel uncomfortable enhancing minority civil rights without parliament’s express consent.
Still, keep in mind that votes are democratic devices; they are not democracy itself.
Casting one’s ballot in parliament to introduce censorship or to deny full citizenship rights to minorities are not democratic acts, even if they follow democratic form.
And securing basic liberties through the use of disputable, though not illegal, processes may in the end prove truly democratic.
