<HEADLINE>
Dollar Turmoil
<P>
CAMBRIDGE: Among most currencies the dollar is king, but held against the DM and the Yen it is the beggar.
In the last two years alone, the dollar declined 20 to 25 percent against these two key currencies.
Over the past decade the decline amounts to 50 to 75 percent respectively.
One might reasonably ask, what is wrong with the dollar.
But the right question is really what is wrong with the DM and the Yen that makes the market price them so aggressively that business can hardly survive.The foreign exchange market makes German and Japanese labor look a lot better than in can possibly be.
In West Germany, hourly compensation now is almost $20 per hour.
In Japan it is up to $25.
Compare that with only $17 in the United States!
<P>
In the United States, the low and falling dollar is not a headline issue.
Nobody cares much, or if they do, they view dollar decline as good news for exporters and wonderful news for firms that compete with imports.
Because the US enjoys financial stability --full employment, very moderate
<P>
inflation of 2 -3 percent per year, a budget deficit smaller (as a share of GDP) than that of Japan or Germany, a public debt ratio that is enviably low compared to most industrial countries – dollar decline is just not a threat.
Moreover, the US is a large, relatively closed economy.
As a result, dollar decline has very little impact on inflation.
In fact, it has so far had absolutely no perceptible impact.
On the US side then, dollar collapse in not a front page story.
<P>
In Japan things are different.
The Japanese are like mice on a treadmill: they are moving production offshore to low labor cost locations in the United States, in Thailand, in Indonesia,wherever entry and even mid-level products (measured in terms of required labor skills) can be produced more profitably than in high wage Japan.
But even as production moves offshore, wave after wave of Yen appreciation hits the manufacturing sector and requires yet more efforts and adjustment.
Export volume has stagnated and imports are rising at double digit levels.
<P>
One would expect that the trade balance soon turns around and helps put a stop to any furthersharpYen rise.
But that is slow in coming; in the meantime, the Japanese financial market furiously adjusts to the rising Yen by doing exactly the wrong thing: they sell off dollar assets, dump dollar earnings to move their balance sheets and income flows into Yen.
They are sick and tired of loosingmoney on their dollar earnings and assets.
As a result, with Japan dumping its large trade surplus and foreign portfolio, and without an offsetting buyer of the dollars, the Yen just keeps rising more and more.
As investors, the Japanese are finally doing well -- going into Yen has proven right.
But as a country they are digging their own grave.
<P>
Is there a likely end to the upward spiral of the Yen?
One answer is that another 5 or 10 percent and Japan will simply keel over, dead.
But that has not been the case when the Yen moved to 100, to 90, to 80.
The mice will stay on the treadmill and Japan, Inc will go offshore.
The picture is complicated by the intense trade conflict between the USA and Japan.
Ostensibly it is about access for US cars and parts to the Japanese distribution system and market.
But more broadly it involves the fact that Japan is just a closed economy, uncompetitive and vigorously defended by bureaucrats and corporate alliances.
Europe accepts the arrangement and responds with similar trade restraints.
The US does not and forces the conflict.
Japan may have the upper hand in public relations having branded the US a "managed trader" and claiming for itself (amazingly) the "free trader" label, but Japan cannot win.
More conflict will mean a yet stronger Yen and that means a progressive hollowing out of Japan, far beyond what already has occurred.
Recession will become depression.
<P>
The dollar issue seen from Germany looks different.
Until recently, the DM was not putting German business under impossible pressure.
Vast restructuring led to a dramatic improvement in costs and made it easy to absorb the DM rise.
Moreover, much of Europe stayed with the DM and that helped shoulder the burden of a more competitive dollar.
More importantly, even if the DM rose on the dollar, it declined on the Yen -- win some, lose some and business could live with that.
But the latest round of dollar hikes tested industry to the core.
Manufacturers spoke up with a common voice: no more!
And that is probably the answer for the time being.
The Bundesbank won't raise interest rates, nor will the Federal Reserve.
The economies are moving parallel and further downward pressure on the dollar is not imminent.
Over time, of course, the dollar has always slipped -- it started at DM/$ 4 after the war and it is only a question of time until it gets to DM/$ 1.
But it will take a few years, now that US inflation, just as in Germany, has become very moderate.
<P>
What are the implications of these currency movements for developing and transition economies?
The exchange rate plays a double role.
One is a nominal anchor and one is a measure of external competitiveness.
For inflation control a strong currency is helpful and a DM tie, for example, works like a brake on any outbreak of inflation.
But viewed from the perspective of trade competitiveness, a DM link is precarious unless wages are strongly tied to the DM.
There is no easy answer to the predicament.
One possibility, clearly, is to give up an independent money and adopt the DM outright as the national money.
That is in conflict, of course, with tradition, culture and the quest for identity and sovereignty even if as an economic answer it is perfect.
The other alternative is to focus exchange rate policy on the maintenance of competitiveness and let monetary and fiscal policy cope with inflation.
That does not work well, but it does work.
<P>
One way or other, instability of the key currencies aggravates the difficult task of macroeconomic management and trade development in emerging and transition economies.
This time round, with the dollar weak, it helps Latin America and hurts the DM periphery.
The comfort for everybody might be that the Yen block is even more exposed.
But careful, that is not quite true.
Japan's hasty move offshore creates new Asian competitors virtually overnight.
But even here the cloud has a silver lining; clearly, Eastern Europe or the former Soviet Union (at least the stable and modernizing regions) are also among the potential offshore locations for a Germany or Japan that is fighting to cut labor costs.
