<HEADLINE>
East Germany: 10 Years of Unification with a Vengeance
<P>
CAMBRIDGE: Ten years after the Berlin Wall’s collapse, Germans look at all the money spent in the East and can’t help feeling that something went wrong.
So much money spent; so much more to be spent; so little to show for it!
Who got it wrong, what critical decisions derailed success?
<P>
The biggest indictment of economic policy toward the former East Germany is that what cost so much delivered so little.
East German productivity remains low and wage costs are formidable; unemployment is huge and runs at twice the West German rate (now historically high by the standards of postwar Germany), and that is not even counting the many make-work programs of all kinds; growth is slow and productivity slower.
Basically it’s all a big and costly disappointment.
<P>
Critics of Russia’s failed transition to a market economy place much store in the failure to establish necessary legal and social institutions before letting market forces take their course.
That surely cannot be the argument in East Germany – institutions arrived overnight with world class West German law, property rights and courts, public administration, banks, a capital market and, to crown it all, West German money.
Overnight, the East German economy got everything economic civilization is all about.
<P>
Popular explanations for both limited success or outright failure go in two directions.
The first, not very politically correct diagnoses, blames poor progress on the fact that East Germans are bad economic agents, blunted as they are by more than a half century of dictatorship.
Even given a chance at first-rate capitalism, they prefer to sit the game out on the guidelines, financed by a generous safety net.
<P>
The alternative explanation is espoused by the ayatollahs of transition: they blame the one for one swap of the East German mark for the Deutsche mark and the quick drive toward pay-parity pushed by the corporatist German system.
They argue that wages are keys to growth and failure to have low wages is the crux of the story.
But how was that to be implemented in a united Germany?
By restrictions on mobility, permits or perhaps a new Wall?
<P>
It is naive to think that East Germany could have kept its low wages and been deprived of a substantial safety net without the risk of massive westward migration; it is even more naive to believe that a democratic German government would have even envisaged unification with residence permits.
This is even more absurd at a time where the European Union was phasing in unrestricted mobility.
<P>
The same goes for the whole economic security blanket – accepting the West German commercial code but eliminating worker co-determination and unions, job protection and the like was just a sheer mad fiction.
In fact, nobody entertained the notion for a moment.
Perhaps those are ideas en vogue in Korea as it thinks about a possible unification, but even there it will be hard to accomplish when the time comes.
<P>
Claims of alternative strategies must therefore be set at a somewhat lower level – say the initial exchange rate which might have been chosen to make East Germany a low wage country.
Even that is a dream since, in the face of high unemployment, East German wages increased substantially every year relative to West Germany.
At a more depreciated conversion rate we would have simply had a more rapid rate of wage inflation.
<P>
One alternative strategy, remotely conceivable, is that West Germany would have foreseen the failure of the experiment before embarking upon it.
The problem after all is not in East Germany but rather in the West.
Unification meant that everybody gets not only the benefits of west German economic institutions – property rights and hard money – but also all disastrously negative institutions: unions, overpaid unemployment and excessive job security, pervasive regulation.
If West Germany, in the face of unification, had rolled back all these unaffordable limitations to the free play of markets, the economic costs would have been far lower: East and West Germany would have more nearly full employment, the drive for productivity would have been far more aggressive.
<P>
Of course, German corporatism did not allow such a solution: unions wanted their wages protected.
The only way to secure them was for the government to pay lots in unemployment compensation in a high wage East Germany.
Because politicians were competing for East German votes, visible gains had to be provided from day one, thus creating the precedent of pay without work.
And German business had its nose in the trough, as they received (at taxpayer expense) investment in the East plus a formidable spending boom up front.
Everybody knew exactly what they wanted in East Germany and they got what they planned.
The good news is that unification took place, the bad news is that East Germany became an even worse economy than the West – unification with a vengeance
<P>
If East Germany has become the perfect mini-me of West German bureaucratic and social inefficiency, there is another chapter to the story.
Today, East Germany is pleading for relief from West Germany’s welfare state.
Perhaps there is a glimmer of the fact that ultimately there will be a hard landing and the money will be cut off.
Better to try a soft landing by phasing out the excessively costly welfare state than to have a full scale crash some time down the road.
East Germany is starting to whittle down wages in firm bargaining and away from industry settlements; East Germany is even moonlighting.
<P>
The great lesson of East Germany is this: West Germany is responsible for the unaffordable problem.
Unification will not go away, and therefore West Germany must change or pay more and more – forever!
