<HEADLINE>
Europe, Japan and the Ghost of John Maynard Keynes
<P>
NEW HAVEN: Eleven countries within the EU are poised to merge their currencies forever into the euro.
As that day approaches, are member governments changing their ideas about what discipline will determine the euro’s value?
<P>
There are advantages, political and economic, in a broad currency union, as demonstrated by the history of the US dollar.
Whether these benefits can be artificially manufactured in a short period of time among diverse governments and economies remains an open question.
Because there is a growing fear among governments that such benefits will occur only in the future, the commitment to fiscal restraint that marked the run up to the euro’s birth is softening as leaders seek to reconcile the single currency with the urgent need to promote growth and employment.
<P>
The members of European Monetary Union are surrendering monetary sovereignty, voluntarily to be sure, but they are surrendering it all the same.
Member countries will no longer have their individual monetary policies, or even discretionary fiscal policies for that matter.
They will no longer be able to adjust to payments imbalances and their macroeconomic consequences by exchange rate movements - as, for example, the U.K. did very successfully in 1992.
<P>
Economists who advocate the euro argue that anything which exchange rate adjustments can do can also be done by movements of commodity prices and wages.
The evidence, however, is that these "remedies" work only very slowly and imperfectly.
In the meantime, a strong euro will require high interest rates to stay high, and the cost in jobs, exports, and growth of GDP will necessarily be high as well.
<P>
Given continental Europe's chronically high unemployment and lack-luster macroeconomic performance, Europeans would be better off with lower interest rates and a weaker currency, which is why it is foolish to regard currency markets, as politicians so often do, as akin to an Olympic competition.
Currencies, and the value of currencies, are not ends in themselves but are instead means to achieve economic results that really matter.
<P>
The same is true of financial markets in general.
Financial globalization, meaning in essence the freedom to make any desired financial transaction, regardless of the currencies involved and the locations and nationalities of those involved in the transaction, is not an end in itself.
It has to be evaluated pragmatically.
A central bank, including the new European Central Bank, in order to conduct a monetary policy geared to its own economic objectives, must be able to make its interest rates move somewhat independently of world market rates.
<P>
To prevent arbitrage tending to undo central bank interventions, countries (in particular small countries) need obstacles to the unwanted movement of funds in and out of their currency.
That is the main purpose behind the proposed taxes on foreign exchange transactions now being discussed around the globe, as well as devices like Chile's extra reserve requirements on foreign-owned deposits.
Protection against extreme financial globalization is essential for sound economic policy.
<P>
Austerity, which now appears to be the standard defense against currency instability, is thus not invariably an essential ingredient in finding a solution to national and international economic crises.
Nor is it always even constructive.
Troubled economies need structural reforms, but macroeconomic recovery programs are the immediate priority.
Europe should bear this in mind.
<P>
Japan is a brutal case in point here.
Its stagnation and spasmodic recessions result from incredible incompetence in macroeconomic policy.
Japan has a full-blown case of "Keynesian" disease.
Misunderstood in the 1930s, this malady led to the Great Depression.
In the 1930s Keynes's message was new and policymakers had not yet absorbed it.
Japanese policymakers today have no such excuse.
Indeed, Japan’s G-7 counterparts (including the Europeans who might well blush here, because their own policies are based on a radically anti-Keynesian view) have been urging Japan to adopt Keynesian policies year after year.
<P>
Japan makes headlines as the climax of the Asian virus, but it doesn't fit that template.
Japan is not running out of international reserves.
It needs no bailout.
Austerity and sacrifice are not called for.
More spending, private and public, yes even deficit spending, is needed on a large, sustained scale, for consumption as well as investment.
<P>
All the pro-saving shibboleths must be suspended until a revived Japanese economy restores business expectations and investments.
Considering the damage Japan's disastrous macroeconomic performance has done to Asia and the world, along with the apparent inability of the Japanese to enjoy spending money on themselves, perhaps Japan’s government should unilaterally transfer bundles of yen to other Asian countries, or to poor countries everywhere, for development projects and relief of poverty, requiring only that these yen be spent in Japan.
<P>
It is interesting to see the world's financial elites seek refuge from the uncomfortable but essential Keynesian advice they are now giving to Japan by changing the subject to financial reform, Big Bang deregulation of Japan’s financial institutions, and fixing the half trillion dollars of bad loans on the books of Japanese banks.
Here is the familiar rhetoric of sacrifice and pain.
These reforms are important, to be sure.
The Reconstruction Finance Corporation in 1932 and the Resolution Trust Corporation of the 1980s are two good American precedents.
But it is a delusion to think that banking problems caused Japan's disaster or that their resolution will restore prosperity.
The ghost of Keynes hovers over Europe and Japan.
