<HEADLINE>
Europe: Twilight At Dawn
<P>
PRAGUE - Recently I tried to discover the origins of the name "Europe".
To my surprise, many see its roots in the Akkadian word 'erebu', meaning twilight or sunset.
"Asia", on the other hand, is supposedly derived from the Akkadian 'asu,' meaning daybreak.
<P>
Initially, as I argued in a speech in Aachen last spring, this discovery seemed discouraging: twilight is often linked with extinction, ruin, or death, the end approaching.
This link is valid, in part: twilight ends the bustle of one day.
But it does not mean defeat, doom, or the end of time.
Twilight, instead, is a punctuation mark in life where something ends so that something else may begin.
For a person, this means that a time of labor -- physical and worldly -- ceases, replaced by a time of contemplation, evaluation, inward endeavor.
Here people reflect on the meaning of their efforts, pause for perspective, regain strength, and make resolves for the future.
Dawn and daylight are the time of hands, twilight the hour of the mind.
<P>
The gloom attached to the word twilight is the fruit of modernity’s cult of beginnings, of progress and growth, inventions, rises -- our cult of industriousness, expansion and energy.
Dawn, daybreak, "sunrise nations" and similar metaphors are popular these days, while sunset, quiet pause, nightfall, evoke stagnation, decline, disintegration or nothingness.
<P>
This is unfair to twilight, to the phenomenon that possibly gave Europe its name.
True, a phase in history is closing.
That fortunate fusion of classical antiquity, Jewish religiosity, Christianity, and the energy of so-called barbarian tribes incited Europe’s unprecedented advance that brought humanity countless things of value and influenced the entire civilization of our age.
Europe, indeed, seems to have introduced the concepts of time and historicity, evolution and "progress" as well.
Seen from a distance of centuries, perhaps all European history will appear as a lone day of vigor, of great discoveries of the mind and the ethos of expansion.
<P>
From the secret of Being and salvation to the secret of matter, from treasures hidden on faraway continents to political values such as the dignity and liberty of the individual and equality of all citizens before the law -- these are areas in which Europe accomplished a remarkable work of discovery which it then spread, often to the world’s benefit, yet often, sadly, to the world's detriment.
Europe’s history is one of the concepts of salvation, freedom, progress and humanity, but also of conquest, plunder, colonization, including the export of such dubious articles as one I experienced -- communist ideology.
<P>
For a long time, Europe has lacked a decisive say on the world's fate.
Nonetheless, we should stop seeing Europe as in the twilight of its energy and recognize a time when physical rush stops and the rule of thought begins.
This is not estrangement from ourselves or the world.
It does mean looking calmly at our accomplishments and assessing the meaning of our endeavors.
Europe has never had a better opportunity for reflection than now; to articulate a meaning for "Europe" is a task for the twenty-first century.
<P>
Lines on a map alone cannot define "Europe".
A second possible meaning is also too narrow, as it refers to the European countries spared the experience of communism, most of which are members of the European Union.
This embraces that Europe able to cultivate democratic politics and civil society for decades, one stable and prosperous and which, step by step, has integrated itself into one political and economic league.
This Europe attracts; so no coincidence that in many countries outside this grouping we hear about their own "return to Europe", which means admission to the club of fortunate nations that lived on the other side of the Iron Curtain.
That contented Europe, however, is too preoccupied with appropriations from Brussels or exports of meat from cows suspected of madness, to undertake a profound self-examination.
It is -- despite the nice words it offers us from time to time -- a rather egocentric Europe, caring more about immediate economic interests than about its ultimate purposes.
<P>
There is, however, a third meaning of "Europe".
This highlights a common destiny, a shared, complex history, common values and a common culture of life.
More than that: it is an area characterized by a certain behavior, a certain sense of will and responsibility.
As a consequence, the borders of this Europe may sometimes be fuzzy; they cannot be determined either by glancing at an atlas or by studying the list of EU member states or the countries (Norway, Switzerland, Iceland) that could join the EU any time.
Talk about this inchoate Europe is difficult and infrequent.
Yet, this is where all debates about Europe and its future should begin.
<P>
A starting point for this twilight meditation should be a discussion about Europe as a world of values, European spiritual identity -- the European soul.
It should be about what Europe used to be and what it believed, what it is and what it believes now, what it should or could be, and what role it could play in the future.
<P>
Europe has always been and remains one indivisible political entity, diverse, intricately structured.
This is not just a result of geography, a concentration of many more or less related peoples.
Thousands of years of common history, lived in different multinational empires, molded Europe into a single spiritual area interconnected by so many political links that severing any one risks disintegration.
<P>
Unless the emerging European order is aware of this interconnectedness it will bring little success to any one.
Imagine a Europe, no longer cut in two by the Iron Curtain, divided against itself: one half stable, prosperous and united; the other, unstable, less prosperous, and resentful.
Just as it is impossible that half a room be forever warm and the other cold, it is unthinkable that two different Europes can exist next to each other without detriment, and the stable and more prosperous half would pay the higher price.
<P>
Harm will come not if Europe expands, only if it fails to expand.
Europe has an unprecedented chance.
If it wastes this opportunity because of short-term individual or economic interests, Europe (both sides) will open the door to all who prefer confrontation to dialogue, who define themselves as against others rather than as their neighbors.
It is no good pretending that people of this type do not exist.
Unless democrats proceed in a timely manner to build Europe’s internal structure as a single political entity, others will build it their way -- and democrats will be left with only their eyes to cry.
The demons that so fatally infected European history -- most disastrously in this century! -- are biding their time.
It would be a tragic error to forget about them because of technicalities over funds, quotas, or tariffs.
<P>
I know that neither the European Union nor the North Atlantic Alliance can open themselves overnight.
What they must do before it is too late is to say to all concerned that these are not closed clubs, then formulate a clear program of enlargement that contains a timetable, and explains the logic of that timetable.
Europe’s twilight will then be the brightening twilight at dawn, not a grim twilight at noon.
