<HEADLINE>
Forward into the Past
<P>
WARSAW: The safe prediction about the presidency of Aleksander Kwasniewski is that predictions will be unsafe.
The politician in Mr Kwasniewski (most of the man) was schooled in a communist party which taught its pupils to dance to the tune of the hour.
The way in which he reconstructed in part the communist machine after its collapse in 1989 confirms Kwasniewski as a nimble-footed leaper on opportunities rather than a plodder after principles.
And the platform on which he rolled into the presidency of Poland turns out to consist of four pairs of roller skates pointing to the West, to the East, to the future, and to the past.
Such a man, on such a vehicle, could end up anywhere even if he declares that his real objectives are the future and the West.
<P>
Kwasniewski's victory exposes a string of paradoxes.
The country that boasted of its primacy in undermining the Soviet empire chose as president, a mere six years after Solidarity's triumph, the leader of a party that never repudiated its communist roots.
The second paradox extends beyond Poland, posing a challenge for all countries in transition from communism: elections that reflect democratic norms may, in fact, destabilize democracy.
<P>
As a man, Kwasniewski may be unalarming, though his heroes -- the interwar Polish national hero (and a man with not the best democratic credentials) Jozef Pilsudski, the communist leaders Wladyslaw Gomulka, Edward Gierek and General Wojciech Jaruzelski, the man who tried to crush Solidarity by imposing martial law -- send shudders down any democrat's spine.
He appears to be no rote ideologue, just a pragmatist as he likes to describe himself.
He may not wish to be Marxist about the Polish economy.
He claims to see the lure of Europe and Nato.
Left to himself, Kwasniewski might be a plausible - if cynical - alternative to the defeated Mr. Walesa.
<P>
The case against Kwasniewski is that he will not be left to himself.
His Democratic Left movement contains a hard core of unreconstructed party members who control many seats in parliament as well as chunks of the trade unions.
From the disgrace of 1989 transformed communists rebounded brilliantly (like the ex-communists of Hungary, Bulgaria, and Lithuania), playing on feelings of loss, fear, and anxiety experienced by many in the wake of speedy reforms enacted by Poland's first post-communist government.
Reeling, many imagine the ex-communists a force capable of synthesizing the positive features of socialism -- guaranteed jobs, adequate pensions -- with the good in today's open society.
Here is the ultimate paradox of the Polish election: to escape the costs of transition people turn to the heirs of the political order responsible for inciting Poland's catastrophe in the first place.
<P>
If nostalgia were all they offered, Kwasniewski's ex-communists would have been defeated.
But ex-communists retain Leninist talents: a tight political structure, grassroots connections, capacity for nationwide activity, and a strong leadership devoted to holding power and enacting long term goals.
Ex-communists have competent and determined activists with experience from the old regime who can mobilize, integrate, and fund political action.
Moreover, post-communists have at their disposal (sometimes hidden) wealth inherited from the old regime.
<P>
Ranged against this tested order remains a large, motley number of political parties with roots in Solidarity but which now quite often treat each other with the venom once reserved for communists.
The difference in the disciplined professionalism of the campaign mounted by Mr. Kwasniewski and that run by Mr. Walesa was a most striking example of these facts.
<P>
Walesa plummeted to pathetic levels of support only a few months before presidential voting.
Ultimately, he won back the votes of almost half the electorate, primarily because he appeared as the most credible candidate capable restraining the ex-communists from holding all levers of political power.
But overweight, ill-educated, speaking broken Polish, Walesa fared badly on TV when contrasted with the permanently tanned, witty, and polished Kwasniewski.
<P>
Relations with the powerful Roman Catholic church remain ambivalent.
Kwasniewski speaks about good church/state relations, but he promotes the policy of limited confrontation with the Church and many of his cronies are firm anticlericals.
In deeply Catholic Poland this should be a disadvantage, but the recent vote gives reason to pause.
Many Poles are wary of the Church's equivocal attitude towards democracy, and are allergic to its aggressive presence in politics.
It is a sad paradox, indeed, that for many the ex-communists, in opposing the church, pose as defenders of the liberal democratic values that they once persecuted with unremitting zeal.
<P>
Kwasniewski’s strategy of seduction appealed to large numbers of the young and the middle class but most of all to peasants, the unemployed, those left behind by Poland's growing economy.
So the man who spoke a lot about the future rode into power saddled on the votes of the past.
This link will dog Kwasniewski's presidency.
The only policies that can keep these groups happy yield either a swelling inflation or reforms that will have him hopping awkwardly from one tactical alliance to another.
This means a period of trimming, accommodation, compromise -- which could mean, on the big issues, indecision -- the last thing Poland needs.
<P>
The Jekyll in Kwasniewski is a practical politician, a reacher for the center.
But he cohabits with the Hyde in him, the part shaped by his political environment.
Poland started its democratic take-off in 1989 profoundly divided -- a legacy of the Communist past.
Those scars were healing with the economic successes of recent years and with social and democratic stabilization.
<P>
The real tragedy is that Poland now faces the danger of reopening the old wounds.
More ominous than the potential actions of the ex-communists is the bitter fact that half of the Polish population, the half that fought so hard to establish democracy in Poland, may see in the new democratically elected president a representative of dictatorship and national dependency and thus consider him morally unfit to hold his office.
<P>
In Polish history, those alienated from power often take their frustrations into the street.
Remember 1980, 1970, 1968, 1956.
In politics, Poland does not mutter, it intermittently goes bang.
