<HEADLINE>
Free Markets For Free Minds
<P>
WARSAW: Recently Poland experienced a typical -- and typically unfinished -- political debate.
It focused on whether a "free" education should be made a constitutional right.
A free, or as its postcommunist advocates prefer to call it, a "not paid for" education, means education in schools and universities owned by the state (but not in private schools).
Only by raising the issue to the level of a constitutional right, say the postcommunists, can the guarantee of free and equal access to education be maintained.
<P>
Due to their dominance in Parliament, the intransigence of the postcommunists on this point forced the other political parties participating in drafting Poland’s new constitution to kowtow to their position.
I do not intend to discuss Poland’s internal politics, but I would like to show how a false understanding of Western practices, combined with a blind insistence on glib, populist solutions, creates unsustainable illusions and may destroy a chance to secure what de Tocqueville called "equality of opportunity."
For not even education can be insulated against the free market without engendering negative results.
<P>
Why exclude education, especially university education, from the free market (and its competitive pressures)?
First, the belief that such a policy produces more equality is mistaken.
To the contrary, by excluding different types of financial incentives based on different abilities, it deepens the cleavage between rich and poor, between big cities and provincial towns and villages.
"Free" education is not really free, because a university student from out of town must pay for accommodation, food, and other services -- in Poland these costs are equal to a sum larger than half of the average salary.
No surprise, then, that the percent of students from small towns and villages recently dropped to an unprecedented 2%.
<P>
If equal opportunity for all is what is desired, a situation must be created whereby talented students from poor families receive, through stipends and tuition exemptions, a truly free education, including some funds for books and accommodation, while less talented students from well-to-do families pay the full cost of their studies.
Otherwise, a "free" university education will remain patently discriminatory in favor of wealthy students from university towns.
<P>
Secondly, a freer market in education creates the only realistic pressure on a hidebound education establishment.
Radical reform of higher education is simply unimaginable without outside pressure on today’s petrified universities.
Competition among educational institutions is very welcome here, even though it may produce some abuses or outright fraud.
In general, people recognize which university education is good and which produces only a sham degree.
<P>
Thirdly, East European countries are too poor to pay from the state budget (as in France or Germany) for quality university education that comes free of direct charge to each student, regardless of means.
An impoverished welfare state is a dangerous, undemocratic, and deracinating idea.
In the era of so-called "real socialism," we had precisely that, and we have to get away from it.
<P>
These concerns are of little import for today’s populists and demagogues, who count on the average citizen’s knee-jerk approval of the idea of "free" education.
But more that just the right to free education is at stake here.
Some socialist ideologues propose to introduce a constitutional right to an apartment; others a right to be free from hunger and want.
It is true that Winston Churchill and Franklin Roosevelt spoke in their wartime "Atlantic Charter" about the right to freedom from want and fear (whatever that may mean), and Thomas Jefferson said that all men have the right pursue their "happiness," but such so-called "rights" can never be made into more than desired goals.
If "constitutionalized", they simply implant the idea that the constitution is a statement of aspirations, rather than a set of enforceable legal rights.
<P>
The desire to limit or protect some forms of human activity from the free market may be understandable, particularly in countries like Poland where the free market is still an unknown animal.
But in a situation where many fields of social life -- such as education, health, and social services -- need quick and radical change, unleashing the free market to do its work offers the only plausible avenue for change.
State-owned health insurance companies, state guaranteed retirement, etc. are not only insecure and inefficient; they are also contrary to the idea of political reform.
These state controlled benefits have little to do with the justice supposedly wanted by their socialist promoters, but everything to do with rent-seeking and corruption.
<P>
Here is the heart of the matter.
Societies (and politicians) in postcommunist countries -- in some Western countries, too -- must be clear about the consequences of modernization as reform is pursued.
Powerful enemies of modernization, such as Poland’s Roman Catholic Church, always exist.
Those who try to reconcile the two would limit modernization to the narrowly economic sphere end up combining economic liberalism with old-style social collectivism.
<P>
If a general social agreement along these lines, with the state viewed not as a facilitator of private transactions but as the benevolent protector of the people, emerges in Eastern Europe, we are likely to end up half in the old world and half in the new.
Such a hybrid, tradition-bound system may function well enough in Asian societies like Japan or South Korea, but not in countries like Poland, which must modernize and demystify their state in order to throw off the inherited inertia of the socialist era.
Thus socialists who propose the right to "free" education as a part of the constitution are cheating society and every individual about the balance of responsibilities that each really holds.
The easy promise of new rights is, today, a pernicious enemy of modernization, and a snare that will keep individuals in thrall to state power.
