<HEADLINE>
Has Financial Collapse Saved Russia?
<P>
MOSCOW: Something surprising has happened to the Russian economy.
Last August, Russia experienced financial collapse, defaulting on treasury bills as its stock market plunged 94% from its October 1997 peak.
The ruble was devalued to one quarter of its prior value.
Half of Russia's banks closed, and many Russians lost their savings, while living standards fell by some 30%.
In September, inflation skyrocketed to 38% a month, and industrial production plummeted by 15%.
Russia seemed in an economic free-fall.
Both GDP and industrial production fell by 5% in 1998, and the IMF forecast a further decline in GDP of 9% in 1999.
<P>
Now everything has changed.
Russia is turning around.
Industrial production has recovered month by month.
It surged by 6.1% in May, and it is heading towards growth of at least 5% this year, though GDP might barely rise as many services are contracting with domestic consumer demand.
While Russian statistics remain poor, the reversal is too great to be in doubt.
<P>
The most obvious reasons for the sudden upturn is the devaluation, which caused an instant halving of imports and made exports cheaper, and rising oil prices.
Industries that have grown the most, however, are not raw materials but intermediary goods, such as chemicals, pulp, paper, and construction materials, and some manufactured goods, notably microbiology, pharmaceuticals, machinery, textiles, shoes, glass and porcelain.
The expansion for some products exceeds 30% in a year, while other industries continue to contract.
<P>
You see the effect in the streets of Moscow.
Suddenly, good Russian products are everywhere, while Moscow used to import 80% of the goods it consumed daily.
Moscow had many good, expensive restaurants, but now plenty of good cheap eating places have surfaced, as limited demand forces Russian producers to penetrate all markets and not only skim markets for the rich.
<P>
Much has been written about the barterization of the Russian economy, but since August 1998 this tendency has been reversed.
The share of barter in inter-enterprise transactions fell from 54% then to 46% in January, and partial evidence suggests that it has plummeted below 40% now.
For instance, in December 1998, the Russian utility giant Unified Energy System (now headed by the former privatization czar Anatoli Chubais) collected 20% of all payments in cash, but in May, this share had risen to 32%.
Russians have started using money as everybody else, and the virtual economy is dwindling.
<P>
Similarly, the infamous inter-enterprise arrears are swiftly contracting, as enterprises force each other to pay.
Big enterprises pay ever more of their taxes in real money rather than in promissory notes of dubious value.
The notorious wage arrears have declined steadily every month since October 1998.
There is no longer any escape for big loss-makers who are forced into bankruptcy, while sound enterprises expand in their place.
The number of bankruptcies has multiplied in a year, while the number of profitable enterprises has increased greatly, as a radical differentiation is occurring between successful and failing enterprises, signifying radical enterprise restructuring.
<P>
Evidence is plentiful.
A qualitative breakthrough is taking place, and not only a temporary improvement caused by devaluation and higher oil prices.
The financial crash did bring about fundamental change in the Russian economy.
Financial crisis at long last made hard budget constraints credible.
The very fierceness of the financial crash convinced everybody that there was no longer any free money that enterprises had to manage on their own.
<P>
The financial crash eliminated all kinds of free money.
The IMF and World Bank no longer offered the government cheap credits.
Foreign portfolio investors, who contributed capital equal to 10% of GDP in 1997, were scared away.
As the government defaulted on its domestic treasury bills, no government bonds found takers.
Initially, the Primakov government tried some monetary financing, but it soon realized that it only led to high inflation.
There was no way to raise taxes or state revenues significantly.
Therefore, the government cut public expenditures by 5% of GDP this year.
Finally, the bank crash eliminated the problem of irresponsible bank credits.
Russian entrepreneurs realized that they had to sell products that could be sold on the market at a profit.
Russia's problem was not at all a lack of demand or credit, but on the contrary the absence of a demand barrier.
<P>
The Russian bank system turns out to have been more harmful than useful.
Contrary to expectations, the payments system now functions much better with the worst half of the bank system bankrupted.
After all, Russian banks did not instill enough confidence to attract vast deposits, and they had neither the necessary information nor skills to lend sensibly.
While bankruptcies often are fraudulent, the key is that the worst villains are forced to close down.
<P>
International financial institutions seem to have provided more moral hazards than effective conditionality in the last few years.
Wisely, they have now withdrawn to foreign debt management and some refinancing rather than providing big credits.
<P>
The Primakov government was remarkably passive.
The best that can be said about it is that it maintained political calm in a period of an unprecedented drop in living standards.
Poverty has doubled and open unemployment has risen to 14%, but those hardest hit by the financial crash were those in the new upper middle class, leading to a drastic decline in income differentials.
Primakov tried to launch communist policies, such as price and currency controls, but failed and found little money to dole out.
Its very passivity underlined the reality of hard budget constraints.
<P>
Ironically, the financial crash provided the shock therapy under communist aegis that the Russian reformers failed to deliver.
In the last two decades, Poland has gone through two financial crashes, which today look like preconditions for Poland's current success.
Russia's sense of humiliation has brought a new seriousness and long-term thinking that are necessary for a real turnaround.
For Russia's sake, let us only hope that it will not be drowned in an excessive inflow of international capital again.
