<HEADLINE>
Helmut Kohl Between East And West
<P>
HAMBURG: If reconciling contradictions is the art of politics, Chancellor Helmut Kohl is a gifted performer.
For 14 years this former provincial boss of tiny Rhineland-Palatina has dominated Germany and Europe; in late October he becomes the longest-serving post-war German Chancellor.
A man of massive physique which he unsuccessfully tries to reduce by annual visits to a healthfarm, Kohl is politically nimble, particularly in diplomacy.
Here he combines old-fashioned German patriotism with a determination to weld his nation into the European Union.
In the West, he is both a European integrationist and an Atlanticist.
Towards the East, many contradictions must be reconciled.
<P>
Kohl never tires of reiterating that the Western pillars of order -- NATO and the European Union (EU) -- must not end at Germany's Eastern borders.
But he worries that Russia may be antagonized as former Soviet satellites or even republics of the Soviet Union gain access to Western organizations.
Squaring that circle is his central task.
<P>
Kohl's unease with Nato enlargement became visible in January 1994, when Nato's leaders accepted the principle of enlargement.
Kohl (as well as Bill Clinton) were wary of rapid implementation, preferring the vague "Partnership for Peace".
If a Western institution is to admit eastern members, Kohl felt, it must be the EU, not Nato.
When Washington, for domestic reasons, changed its mind and pressed Nato expansion, the Chancellor had no choice but to consent.
<P>
Yet he remained unenthusiastic.
In February 1996, Kohl urged that Nato put enlargement on hold until the Russian and US presidential elections passed.
He instructed ministers not to discuss the matter publicly and suggested that talks not be left in the hands of the Nato machinery alone.
To underline this, the Chancellor's first foreign policy activity after returning from his summer's vacation was a visit, in early September, to the ailing Boris Yeltsin, with whom Kohl has friendly relations.
<P>
This visit yielded another appeal not to rush Nato enlargement.
In Germany's parliament, the Chancellor announced that Yeltsin, after his operation, would "renew the necessary dialogue and address specific issues more urgently, such as Nato enlargement...And I have been able..to reach agreement with President Clinton, President Chirac and Prime Minister Major that we would now refrain firmly from dealing with the important matter of Nato-enlargement in some framework so that Moscow does not feel we are creating a fiat accompli."
The message, once more, was contradictory: Nato would not invite new members from the East before setting a new strategic relationship with Russia -- but, of course, Moscow could not veto enlargement.
<P>
Where does Kohl stand?
He knows enlargement will happen, and does not want to stop it; for Germany it is desirable that neighbors to the East, like those to the West, be allies.
But Kohl does not want Russia to feel rejected or provoked to take the types of countermeasures some people in Yeltsin's entourage have threatened.
<P>
Reconciling these polar considerations is vintage Kohl: he temporizes whilst engaging in the foreign policy he likes best - high-level personal contact.
Lessons learned as a young politician shape his approach: create mutual trust by making buddies of opponents, then strike a deal that both sides can live with.
<P>
In many respects the Russian leader is a kindred spirit.
Both men are remarkably similar - in physique, their preference for bucolic pleasures and penchant for personalizing politics.
Suspicious of bureaucracies and ritual, they have struck as close a personal affinity as politicians can.
For Yeltsin, Kohl is his trusted interlocutor in the West; for Kohl, Yeltsin personifies the mixture of old and new which is Russia today.
<P>
This trust sustains Kohl's confidence that he can reconcile the contradictions inherent in Nato enlargement: an opening of the Alliance to new members, and a special arrangement between Nato and Russia (and also, incidentally, between Nato and Ukraine).
<P>
Reconciliation will come in installments.
In December, the OSCE-Summit in Lisbon will discuss the new security order and new rules for conventional arms control in Europe, both designed to reassure Russia.
In the summer of 1997, Nato will announce the three or four East European candidates for membership, most likely Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic.
Meanwhile, not least due to the prompting of the German Chancellor, Western efforts to define future Nato-Russia cooperative efforts are intensifying.
<P>
All could run aground because of Kohl's method of personalizing international relations.
Nobody knows if Yeltsin will survive his forthcoming operation or, if he does, when and how he will take a firm hold of Russian power again.
And while Helmut Kohl is confident to remain chancellor into the next millennium, relations between Russia and the West are too important to be entrusted to personal chemistry between leaders.
Only structures can link states; only institutions give permanence to the ideas of politicians.
<P>
Perhaps both men understand this.
Following their recent summit, Yeltsin announced that Russia is considering institutional arrangements with the Western Alliance, thoughts long in Mr. Kohl's mind.
Yeltsin claimed that this would have to be in place before Nato expands.
But Kohl has left Yeltsin in no doubt that Nato enlargement will get underway in 1997 in any event.
Preferably, the Nato Summit will both formally invite the first candidates for Nato membership and announce, with President Yeltsin present, a Charter of Russia-Nato relations.
Here Kohl's circle could be squared.
<P>
Post-war Germany has been fortunate in its chancellors.
Adenauer steered West Germany into the Western community.
Brandt began and Schmidt continued reconciliation with the East while confirming the country's place in the West.
Building on this foundation, Kohl brought unification to his divided country.
By forcing European integration, he succeeded in making Germany a reliable partner for Europeans and Americans alike, and a trusted interlocutor for Russia.
Not a bad way of reconciling contradictions.
