<HEADLINE>
Homelands Lost?
<P>
NEW YORK: My father's tears as we left Breslau forever in 1938 are unforgettable.
But as a 12 year old boy I was thrilled to be leaving the squalor of that time.
Nowadays when asked what the word 'homeland' means to me, my answer surprises even myself -- "homeless."
There are many ways to lose one's home.
It can be, as mine was, expropriated in your own homeland.
Exile that results is a condition endured by millions in this century.
<P>
Exile and loss; exile and longing; exile and banishment: frozen by tyrannical rule, these are memories abruptly released by the revolutions of 1989 and 1991.
From Central Europe to Central Asia, long suppressed resentments and longings of this sort have clawed their way to the surface of the new world.
This anguish reflects not only the loss of home, language, and livelihood.
More deeply, its bitterness lays in human and spiritual loss.
For home imprints identity; it is like the air we breathe; we become fully aware of it only when it is lost or poisoned.
<P>
Many people live entirely in this vanished past; their memories consumed by their tormentors of yesterday.
We may hope that, as the years march on, such feelings will fade; but we also know that these emotions have uses that incite political opportunists to fan the dying embers.
Mischief can always be made by those who want to gain political ground by picking at old wounds.
Such bitterness spoils memories of the past and makes life in the present harder to endure.
But homeland is no kitsch nostalgia.
Home is a private possession.
To pay it true homage demands knowledge, and the pain that comes with such knowledge.
<P>
Vaclav Havel has powerfully described this urge to live "in truth."
Today's truth is that we must learn to live within a new understanding.
What helps in this is the removal of old taboos and a confrontation with one's own complicated past.
The Polish intellectual and Foreign Minister, Wladyslaw Bartoszewski put this well in his speech to the German Bundestag: "Since one is allowed now to speak about the fate of the refugees from Vilna and Lvov, it is also easier to see the dimension of the human drama of the refugees from Breslau or Stettin...
We deplore the individual fate and the suffering of the innocent Germans who lost their homeland due to the war and its consequences."
Wherever the resentments of homelands lost simmer, the cure can only come through acceptance by all that wrong has been done, that lost homelands impose pain not just on your people but on others.
(Today's bitter diplomatic disputes between Germany and the Czech Republic over the Nazi wartime occupation and the expulsion of 3 million Sudeten Germans that followed in 1945 is emblematic of the price still to be paid by denial of history.)
<P>
Understanding is intrinsic to reconciliation.
Inner healing that transmits a memory of the past into a new life is also demanded.
You lose your homeland forever only when you falsify its memory.
<P>
Germans have had five decades to "live in truth" about what their fathers and mothers did in the name of all Germans.
In her impressive speech in the Bundestag marking the 50th anniversary of the end of Hitler's War, Rita Sussmuth said that harsh truths would "not have to be mentioned again and again, if they were not questioned again and again."
For the peoples of Eastern Europe, however, such recognition was closed.
Silence was the order of the day.
One would wish that the search for truth would now become the order of the day.
<P>
Reconciliation, however, cannot simply be about gestures.
It demands daily work, for it would be stupid to deny or underestimate the power of the lingering hatreds that litter the countries emerging from tyrannical rule.
So recognition must be married to reconciliation.
Otherwise no individual, let alone a people or a country, will find it easy to face and admit his, her, their own guilts.
Wallowing in private pain is far easier.
Reconciliation may not heal all wounds, nor may recognition satisfy the quest for justice.
It is not a form of spiritual restoration.
Marion Donhoff may have said this best: "Perhaps this is the highest degree of love: to love without possessing."
<P>
In 1979 I returned to my birthplace of Breslau, to visit the old villa of my grandmother.
The landlord at the time -- we could communicate only in French -- was a Polish cavalry officer who led me into a living room filled with photographs of children confined with him at Auschwitz.
The old officer showed me his concentration camp tattoo and talked about his five years in the death camps of Birkenau, Auschwitz, and Buchenwald.
On a table stood a wooden bust of Father Kolbe, the Polish priest who had recently been beatified by Pope John Paul II.
Father Kolbe had suffered in the camps the fate that my family escaped.
The old officer and I shook hands and I felt the surge of an overwhelming emotion: some things in this world are just, some chance meetings lead to truth.
<P>
Friendships like that form for us all a kind of adopted homeland, a land of personal recognitions and reconciliations with a history we thought too painful to bear.
If we are open to them, such epiphanies are present.
Today, they are irreplaceable for all those who see themselves as homeless, separated from the homelands they have lost.
