<HEADLINE>
IMF at the Crossroads
<P>
WASHINGTON, DC: I have no personal opinion on the virtues of Caio Koch-Weiser, Germany's candidate to head the International Monetary Fund.
But dithering over Michel Camdessus's replacement ought to stop.
Stanley Fischer, a brilliant, experienced economist will lead the Fund very well in the interim.
But the acting head of an organization has no mandate for change.
So Fischer, while able, is not enabled.
<P>
That is a shame, for a constellation of factors now places the IMF at a crossroads where creative leadership is needed.
Numerous suggestions for changes in its mission and modus operandi are in the air, not least the proposals of US Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers.
(America's Treasury is known to throw its weight around!)
<P>
Leadership change also creates a natural moment for organizations to take stock and ask basic questions.
Institutional inertia, always a powerful force at the Fund, is now at a cyclical low.
Moreover, the IMF is not currently consumed with putting out international financial fires.
It has the time to consider long-term issues.
And what are those issues?
Here is my list:
<P>
1.
To the rescue.
How often, under what conditions, and for how long should the IMF offer financial assistance to distressed nations?
This hot-button issue is the part of the Summers' proposal that receives the most attention.
His answers are, basically: less often, only in emergencies or crises that pose systemic risk, and for short periods of time.
<P>
In the abstract, these are reasonable guidelines.
But what would they mean in practice?
Start with the term "emergency."
Surely, anything can be construed as an emergency.
So ask yourself this question: which IMF intervention in the 1990s would have been ruled out by this principle?
Furthermore, do we really want to eliminate the possibility of lending to stave off a collapse before it occurs?
I think not.
<P>
Then there is the concept of systemic risk, which is not only in the eye of the beholder but may be impossible to predict.
The Mexican crisis of 1994-1995 was seen as a systemic risk from Washington, but not from most European capitals.
Americans thought the Europeans parochial; they thought the US unduly influenced by its 2000 mile border with Mexico.
Everyone agrees that Ecuador posed no systemic risk (though it was an emergency!), but what about Brazil?
And who before July 1998 thought that a Russian default would trigger global financial panic?
<P>
So, other than keeping the financing period short, there is less to this notion than meets the eye.
<P>
2.
Fixed or floating?
The IMF originated as the policeman for the Bretton Woods system of fixed exchange rates.
In my view, it needs not only to shun its traditional role as defender of pegged rates but actively to support (dirty) floating rates for most nations.
Not everyone agrees.
Currency boards and even dollarization are both now in vogue.
It seems to me that exchange-rate arrangements pose a first-order question which the Fund must address.
<P>
3.
Too much austerity?
A number of vocal critics, notably Joseph Stiglitz and Jeffrey Sachs, bemoan the Fund's (almost) reflexive resort to fiscal and monetary austerity.
I think these critics have a valid point, and the IMF should mend its ways.
There are a time and place for tighter budgets and higher interest rates, especially when monetization of large government budget deficits fuels inflation.
But the time is not all the time; the place is not everywhere.
<P>
4.
Who are the clients?
When the IMF rescue squad rushes to help a distressed nation, whom are they there to protect?
Local governments and/or financial institutions?
Western creditors?
My suggested answer is different: the millions of innocent bystanders who played no role in creating a financial house of cards but who suffer when it falls.
<P>
It has been argued that the IMF should take a more narrow financial focus, not seek to be a supranational welfare agency.
The latter role, it is argued, is best left to the World Bank.
I can't get excited about this division-of-labor issue.
The important thing is to make sure that someone assumes this role; if the IMF drops it, the World Bank must pick it up.
Furthermore, even "strictly financial" decisions can have major consequences for social welfare – consequences the IMF must not forget.
<P>
5.
Fast or slow?
As late as the fall of 1997 – after Asia's crisis already began! – the IMF and the US Treasury were still pushing all countries to open up their markets to international capital flows as quickly as possible.
Lately, a new consensus seems to be developing: that emerging-market countries should proceed cautiously with capital market liberalization until they have more of the prerequisites – sound banking systems, proper supervisory structures, and reasonable and transparent accounting and reporting systems – in place.
Is "go slow" or "go fast" now the IMF's position on this crucial issue?
<P>
6.
Borrowing in foreign currency.
I confess to being a member of a minority that thinks countries should do most of their borrowing in their own currency, especially if they peg their exchange rate.
The crushing burdens created when debt is denominated in foreign currency and the exchange rate crumbles were at the heart of virtually every financial crisis of the 1990s.
Yet it seems that neither the IMF, nor most financial experts, nor many nations learned this lesson.
Will the IMF endorse or oppose this view?
<P>
These are just a few of the many questions awaiting the attention of the IMF's new managing director.
It's high time that he or she was put in place and got down to business.
<P>
Alan S. Blinder, formerly deputy chairman of the US Federal Reserve Board, is professor of economics at Princeton University, visiting fellow at the Brookings Institution, and managing partner of the Promontory Financial Group.
