<HEADLINE>
Is Brazil The Next Mexico?
<P>
CAMBRIDGE: Today, worries about Brazil are as pervasive as they were about Mexico two years ago.
But that does not mean that Latin America's biggest economy will collapse as ignominiously as Mexico's did.
However, Brazil is driving in the wrong lane, with policies that are dead wrong and expensive.
<P>
The difference between Brazil and Mexico begins with the fact that there is still time for Brazil to right itself.
On Mexico's time table, Brazil is somewhere between 1989 and 1993.
Moreover, even without a timely correction, Brazil will respond to crisis in a far different way to Mexico.
Rightly or wrongly, Mexican policymakers were in awe of Wall Street; Brazil has no such hang up.
Ultimately, Brazilian policymakers are concerned with their own well being, not with the prosperity of foreign investors.
If and when the two part, Brazilian policymakers will shed few tears for international investors.
<P>
On the surface and below, Brazil has made a dramatic turn: inflation is down to negligible levels.
Finance minister Cardosa and his team, with the 1994 "Plano Real" (the introduction of a new, hard currency) did a great job.
Growth is strong, privatization is coming on, owners of capital are enthusiastic.
<P>
[html1]
<P>
* Forecast
<P>
Parallel developments with Mexico exist, of course.
Among them:
<P>
Brazil, like Mexico, has opened its economy.
Trade liberalization, to maintain employment and promote growth, requires an offsetting real depreciation of the currency.
But the real exchange rate in Brazil has appreciated substantially.
Prices in dollars are at least 45% higher today than three years ago (see Table 2) This is not an esoteric economic issue; Brazil is just plain expensive.
<P>
Brazil's economic policy is now driven by politics, primarily the need to secure a second term for the president.
So avoidance of a harsh landing before the next vote is critical.
<P>
Brazil, like Mexico, is flooded with foreign capital.
As reserves build up, balancing the external account is no issue.
And if so much money is coming in, how can policies be wrong?
Or so ministers ask themselves.
<P>
Brazil has shown very little growth over the past 15 years; per capita income today is less than in 1980.
Investment performance has deteriorated.
The country has fallen far behind in world competitiveness.
<P>
Unlike Mexico, a serious fiscal problem exists in Brazil.
<P>
Unlike Mexico, Brazil has extremely high real interest rates and pervasive banking problems -- and this even before the issue of whether or not the real is overvalued is factored into the picture.
<P>
Brazil today, to be sure, has some distinct advantages over Mexico three years ago.
Brazil is not running a trade deficit at 7 or 8% of gdp, as did Mexico.
In fact.
Brazil's current account as a share of gdp was nearly balanced in 1995.
A recession helped, but even in recession Mexico had no such results.
<P>
Political advantages also favor Brazil.
Politics in Brazil are frankly far more stable than in Mexico.
Brazilian democracy is now rooted, even if it is hard to predict who will win elections.
In Mexico, anything can happen.
<P>
Brazil's recent stabilization was based on its ingenious shift to a new currency.
On the fiscal side, however, nothing happened.
In fact, the deficit has swollen.
So how did inflation become lowered?
First, by an immediate break in the country's inflationary inertia as expectations of continuing inflation were shattered.
Inflation stays low because real interest rates have remained high, as much as 50% in real terms last year.
Of course, such rates put strains on the banking system, which now abound.
Compounding this was a strong appreciation in the exchange rate.
This is becoming a headache for business and government responds with old-fashioned remedies: export subsidies and import controls.
<P>
What comes next?
It is obvious that the government does not want to risk inflation by toying with the exchange rate.
Later it must do so.
The alternative is to create financial hype by aggressive privatization, overshadowing problems with foreign enthusiasm.
Once the president's reelection is secure, the problems can be tackled for real.
<P>
Can this work?
Once big companies like Valle do Rio Doce, and telephone companies go up for sale the hype will be spectacular.
No growth, but lots of investment.
Manufacturers will remain on the ropes, but finance will do the Lambada.
<P>
But privatization cannot substitute for delayed actions.
There is little chance that Brazil will suffer a speculative attack a la Mexico.
And today's huge reserves can disappear if bad news begins to mount, pushing up interest rates.
(Failure to raise them in Mexico opened the floodgates to disaster.)
This will be the moment of potential crisis.
It will happen in an uncontrolled way if a controlled devaluation -- coupled with other reforms -- is not undertaken.
For ending inflation was but the first step.
Brazil's disastrous management over 15 years has left most Brazilians much poorer.
A balanced budget, decentralization of the state, and high savings rates will also be needed to reverse the trend.
In developing countries, performance should be measured in real income growth, not stock market hype.
