<HEADLINE>
Kosovo: Appeasement Revisited?
<P>
JERUSALEM: Nagging tensions along the Yugoslav-Albanian border have dramatically focused attention on the dangers of a major international conflagration arising from the continuing crisis in Kosovo.
They also prove once more - if added proof is needed - the short-sightedness and woeful inadequacy of today’s international system in its ability to contain conflicts and intervene in a timely fashion.
In the kind of ethnic conflicts stirred by the disintegration of communism, the world seems to prefer to react after the blood has begun to flow.
In Kosovo, such passivity means that preventive diplomacy is failing once again.
<P>
The reason for this is, in a way, simple: world leaders and statesmen react only to acute crises and have terrible difficulty in mobilizing their own attention - and in trying to galvanize popular support in their own countries - when a crisis is "only" dormant and not yet violent.
This is the pattern of all the post-1991 crisis in the former Yugoslavia.
Had there been an immediate threat of intervention after the Serbian shelling of Dubrovnik or the siege of Vukovar, then the later massacres and ethnic cleansings, the shameful siege of Sarajevo, the brutalities in Mostar and the mass murders in Srebrenica could have been avoided.
<P>
Yet the lesson of those failures has not been learned.
The Dayton Accords that delivered today’s uneasy "peace" to Bosnia Hercegovina became a possibility - and an imperative for President Clinton -- only when his own prestige, and the role of the United States itself in world politics, appeared to be in jeopardy.
<P>
For years, every person acquainted with the ethnic tensions and brutality of President Milosovic’s rule in Kosovo knew that the situation was becoming increasingly dangerous.
A subterranean violence has been mounting in this volatile area since the break-up of Yugoslavia.
While Kosovo is, technically, an internal problem of Yugoslavia/ Serbia, it has obvious regional dimensions, and every report published on the situation predicted dire consequences for Albania as well as Macedonia if the situation got out of hand.
<P>
But the peaceful methods of Kossovar Albanians under the leadership of Ibrahim Rugova, as well as the West’s need to appease Slobodan Milosevic in the context of the Dayton Accords, caused a low key approach to be used in Kosovo.
Rugova and his adherents stuck to their remarkable peaceful methods and "shadow administration" of Kosovo in hope that some international, mainly Western, help would eventually come to relieve the situation.
When I visited Prishtina last year, an Albanian leader asked me in desperation: "Do we have to practice terror and hijacking like the PLO to get the world’s attention?"
<P>
But except for the outer wall of sanctions against Yugoslavia, over the past four years nothing has happened.
Even the recent threat of further limited sanctions issued by the so-called "Contact Group" does not amount to much.
Stalemate and silence from the international community are usually incitements to extremism on one side, and extreme repression on the other.
This is what has happened now, with the violent tactics of the Kosovo Liberation Army and the brutal repressive measures of Yugoslav special forces, which obliterate whole villages, with their civilian population, to terrorize and retaliate.
<P>
Yet, it is not too late to intervene in order to prevent major bloodshed and, perhaps worse, a spillover of the conflict into neighboring countries.
What is needed - as in the early phases of the war in Bosnia - is not direct military intervention, but a credible threat of the use of force.
The United Nations, as usual, is helpless, powerless and hopeless.
The European Union revealed the bankruptcy of its non-existent foreign policy in the earlier stages of the conflicts in Croatia and Bosnia, and that impotence remains.
Moreover, the EU today now too immersed in the economics of euro-politics.
Only the United States just as after Srebrenica - can lead a preventive diplomacy accompanied by the credible threat of force.
<P>
Such leadership demands courage and foresight, and a pro-active, and not reactive policy.
Secretary of State Madelaine Albright, with her Central European background, knows that Munich-style appeasement only causes worse violence.
But she needs the support of the President and, above all, of a wary Pentagon, which must begin to realize that while force should never, ever be the first resort, there are situations where both humanity and realpolitik call for the necessity of America being willing to use arms before the worst happens.
<P>
For if a credible threat of the use of force will not be issued by the United States now - despite all the difficulties - the alternative may very likely be a regional war of catastrophic dimensions.
The danger then will not only be posed by the thousands of innocent victims and a flood of refugees, but of a regional destabilization including Macedonia, Albania, Bulgaria and maybe even that Nato linchpin, Turkey.
If such chaos results, much more force will be needed to quell it than now.
The lesson of the failure in Bosnia was precisely this, a containable problem threatening to get out of control because of the West’s inattention.
Are America and the West averting their eyes, and their responsibilities, once more?
