<HEADLINE>
Lionel Jospin: Europe's Last Chance?
<P>
PARIS: For the fifth time in sixteen years the French have switched course, putting the opposition in power.
Such fickleness is, above all else, a sign of the disappointment the French feel in the face of the incapacity of successive governments, whether of the Left or of the Right, to keep their promises, especially on the matter of reducing unemployment.
<P>
The Left secured only 40% of the vote in the first round, and its success in the second round had a great deal to do with the support it received in one-fourth of the constituencies from the extreme right National Front of M. Jean-Marie Le Pen.
The Gaullists used to believe that the sharp division between the communists and the socialists would assure them a very long tenure at the helm of the French state.
And under presidents de Gaulle, Pompidou, and Giscard d'Estaing that faith was not misplaced.
<P>
Francois Mitterrand turned this situation around by not only striking an alliance with the Communist party (a deal by which the latter became permanently enfeebled), but also by introducing a (by now again abandoned) system of proportional representation, one which allowed the National Front to enter the political landscape of France in force.
Nowadays, it is the Right that is paralyzed by its divisions, a mirror image of what the left used to be.
As a result, certain conservatives are today advocating the same strategy toward the National Front as that which allowed Mitterrand to succeed so well with respect to the Communists.
<P>
The new change of the majority surprised everyone, most particularly Jacques Chirac.
In calling for early elections, originally scheduled for 1998, he had hoped to obtain a new confirmation of the mandate of his prime minister, Alain Juppe, who has been beset by ever harsher critiques.
Chirac also hoped to strengthen his own bargaining power in negotiations over the common European currency.
But the Right's defeat means that, for the second time, Chirac is now obliged to "cohabit" with his old adversaries.
<P>
The first such "cohabitation" took place between 1986 and 1988, when Chirac was the prime minister under Francois Mitterrand.
But then he had won the elections and enjoyed a free hand in all matters except foreign policy and defense, with respect to which the Constitution obliged him to take into account the views of the President.
Now the roles are reversed, and it is President Chirac who finds himself in a position of weakness.
He can expect little if any help from his own party which, preoccupied by the need to find a new leader to succeed the unfortunate Juppe, is now paying the price of Chirac's inability to communicate effectively with the French people and is not inclined to consult him about its new choice.
<P>
Lionel Jospin thus enjoys significantly more power than any of his predecessors as prime minister under the Fifth Republic.
The Communist party, which had fewer than 10% of the vote during the first round, will certainly give him less trouble with its three minor ministries than it would have had if it remained outside the government with nothing to lose.
Streamlined, strongly rejuvenated and "feminized," the new government has been well received not only by public opinion, but also by the bourse.
While financial and political scandals -- the notorious French "affaires" -- are multiplying, none of the new government members appears to be under the slightest suspicion of involvement; something that could not have been said about the previous ministerial team, or about the entourage that surrounded President Mitterrand.
<P>
Equally striking is the modesty of the victors, in stark contrast to the usual triumphalism.
It is certainly due in part to the personality of Lionel Jospin, an austere and unassuming Protestant.
But is also a sign of the difficult problems that need to be solved, beginning with the reduction of unemployment which, despite various palliatives, has now reached 12.8% and affects one of every four young people.
The economy, indeed, shows no signs of a revival.
The state is overburdened with debt, taxes are among the highest in the world, and the success of the Left encourages ubiquitous salary demands.
<P>
At least at first glance, the planned introduction of the common European currency, the euro, on which Jospin has imposed four additional preconditions, now also appears to face mounting difficulties.
But despite all the wailing from supporters of monetary union, there may be an opportunity here.
For the clumsiness of Chancellor Kohl in seeking to force the Bundesbank to revalue Germany's gold reserves (a fiscal fudge designed to allow Germany to meet the Maastrich criteria), and the fact that after the victories of Tony Blair in Britain and Jospin in France only Germany and Spain are now ruled by governments of the Right, should facilitate the search for a compromise.
<P>
Whatever the outcome, it should be clear to everyone that the Jospin government may be the last chance for Europe.
Given the breakdown of the Right, there is a strong chance that Jospin's failure may usher in a period of serious French social upheaval and/or an even stronger rise by the National Front, the most determined enemy of Europe.
Is there anyone with an interest in that?
