<HEADLINE>
Market Mechanisms and the Order of Society
<P>
VIENNA: Communism's collapse did not mean that the market had won a total victory.
Instead, it was the effort to eliminate the market that failed, which is not exactly the same thing.
Moreover, the market still has enemies, for the effort to eliminate markets is not the only enemy that markets have.
<P>
Markets are the products of a very basic human characteristic, namely the characteristic to trade, to barter, or exchange goods and services.
These markets existed also in the Soviet Union at a time when great efforts were made to suppress them.
They existed as the shadow economy and I will never forget a visit to an institute in Moscow in 1983, where I had long conversation on the structures and functions of the shadow economy in the Soviet Union and the difficulties that arose from the fact that as, officially, this shadow economy did not exist there were no legal framework within which it could function.
Thus shadow economy developed its own crude legal framework and executed it with rather through brutal means.
The shadow economy at that time was said to produce between 25% - 35% of the GDP in the former Soviet Union.
<P>
Markets exist wherever humans organize a society.
The effort to eliminate markets by eliminating their basic conditions is a phenomenon of the twentieth century.
These efforts are based on theories which were developed in the nineteenth century as a result of the economic and social conflicts produced by industrialization.
In pre-modern times, men also sought to restrain markets: by organizing trades and crafts, by restricting the entry into markets.
But markets were never totally eliminated with the kind of determination that was applied to this task in the twentieth century.
<P>
The conflict with the market resulted from the unrestrained liberalism of the nineteenth century, best defined by the famous phrase "that freedom includes the right to sleep on the bridges."
Scarcity of capital and abundance of labor resulted in increasing human exploitation, which in turn resulted in efforts to overcome what was considered, or was considered at least by people like Marx, to eliminate the causes of this kind of exploitation.
<P>
Here, two basic approaches to the problem, a revolutionary one and an evolutionary one, were made.
The evolutionary won out in West Europe, the revolutionary was adopted by the Soviet Union, under conditions that were very unfavorable to the idea that a large industrial proletariat would support the revolution.
At the time Lenin started his revolution in the Soviet Union, there was a very small proletariat population against a very large agricultural population.
The basic Marxist prerequisites that were eliminated, or meant to be eliminated, were freedom, property, the right to negotiate contracts, and to form associations under the law.
<P>
The elimination of markets is the most complete and all encompassing form of dictatorship, but one doomed to break down.
Since the fall of the Berlin Wall we have found analysis made by the experts of the state security police and the state security ministry of the former German Democratic Republic which demonstrate that the GDR was bankrupt, but that this information was treated as the ultimate state secret (also described was what could be done to fool the world about that fact).
The reason for this failure, which is of course also the reason for the superiority of market economies as they are manifested in free societies, is superiority lies in the free civil society as a major source of innovative development.
This results from chances and opportunities individuals have to develop.
<P>
Individual development, of course, takes place under conditions of competition.
The innovative qualities of civil society are per se superior to the innovative qualities of bureaucracies.
And if you completely control the economic process and eliminate any kind of market process in competition, you are actually your underwriting a breakdown of your own system.
<P>
So the effort to eliminate markets failed, but that doesn't mean that enemies of the market system have disappeared.
The market system, as an institution, as a process, is based on competition.
Competition means the free development of alternatives and the competition of alternatives with one another, and of course in the process of this competition, the production by innovation, by inventiveness, by alternatives and new proposals.
In a way, free market democracies are a continuous plebiscite of those looking for an alternative that suits their individual or corporative purposes.
This continuous process of selection, like the process of selection of goods and services, does take place in a competitive way.
<P>
Now this competitive process, not only is capable but is actually meant to endanger existing structures and vested interests that no longer serve the purpose of demand.
In other words, a competitive process is a process that induces change, even if the existing structures and vested interests would like to eliminate change in order to continue their existence.
There is therefore a continuous effort in a market economy to reduce or eliminate competition.
You always have this conflict between the competitive process on one side and the desire to eliminate this competitive threat.
<P>
So the enemies of the market do not only come from an ideological process.
A market economy is always under danger of competition being restrained or eliminated.
To maintain competition is, thusly, not only a criteria for economic growth, but a matter of the good order of society.
If you want to keep a society open and capable to develop, you must see to it that the forces that want to eliminate competition are not successful.
<P>
Here there is an interesting difference between American or Anglo-Saxon thinking and European thinking, and that difference became apparent in the very last years of the nineteenth century.
In Germany the highest court decided that to the use of a contract, or the formation of associations on the basis of contract, for the purpose of eliminating competition was compatible with the law, it was compatible with the freedom to compete.
The consequence of that basic decision was that German industry until the 1930s was fully cartelized.
To give you an idea of the consequences, not only the economic consequences, but the political consequences, remember that Hitler built his four year economic plans on the foundation of a totally cartelized German economy with the consequence that he did not need government to execute his four year plans, it was executed by private law.
And the execution of a private law system is much more efficient than the execution by bureaucracy.
<P>
At the same time, in America, 1900 to be precise, Sherman introduced his Sherman Act in the Senate of the United States and his reasoning was totally different.
He said if we do not want dictators running our lives, we cannot accept someone who can dictate prices.
For Sherman, competition was the prevention of excessive power.
The protection of competition was the prevention of abusive power structures within civil society.
He didn't fear power structures that were based on government intervention or the desire by government to plan the economy, but those based on the desire of participants in the economic process to eliminate competition and determine the process of supply and demand by virtue of either monopoly or cartels.
<P>
One of the most important arguments against a market economy is that markets are blind to justice and social demands.
That is correct.
A market process is blind to the nominative evaluation of market results.
It is not capable of producing social justice.
<P>
The reason is simple.
Assume that you go into a shop and want to buy a drilling machine and you are offered three such machines: one from China, one from Spain, and one from Germany.
The Chinese is the most inexpensive, the Spanish is somewhere in the middle, and the German is very expensive.
I do not think anybody who comes into a shop to buy a drilling machine will buy the German one in order to protect German jobs.
He will not calculate the possible consequences of his or her purchase on the labor market, on the social system, and he shouldn't because markets would not function as an instrument to manage the complexity of a highly sophisticated economy if criteria such as these would enter market decisionmaking.
<P>
So this task, the definition of justice and social needs, is a task that has to be accomplished by the legal system, by law and government, and in doing so you harness the freedom of the market, but you do not eliminate it.
You put it under a nominative domestication.
You demand that certain things in the market should not take place for different purposes.
The two reasons for harnessing markets in this way are: 1. protect the freedom in the market from intervention by private power, and 2. to create a condition of social protection in the widest sense of the word.
<P>
Now in 1954, in Germany, when the discussion on the social market economy began, Chancellor Adenauer asked very learned persons what tasks such a social order needed to perform.
One stated that the state was responsible for defining and assuring a supply of basic needs, but that government should not go beyond supplying these basic needs.
On the basis of these basic needs, individuals should have the right to determine how they would further protect themselves from risks or how they would use their buying power and to what end.
<P>
Today we must again ask ourselves, what are these basic needs?
Define them in an expansive fashion and you increase government intervention.
Define them narrowly and you increase the freedom of individual action.
In the former case, you will probably have more equality, in the latter case you will have more inequality.
In the case of more equality of results, you will have a less dynamic economy; in the case of more inequality of results that do not border on injustice, you will have a more dynamic economy.
<P>
The political disputes now taking place in Great Britain, in Germany, and in other countries, concerns the effort to define the right equilibrium.
What is the right balance between a market and government intervention?
In Germany we have reached an intervention status that can be easily expressed by the fact that 50% plus of GDP in Germany is controlled directly or indirectly by the state: 30% through the collective social security distribution systems, and about 23% through direct taxes.
So more than half of GDP is non-market economic allocation.
<P>
This increasingly is considered to be beyond the desirable equilibrium and that is why we presently are confronted in Germany and other continental European countries with the difficult task of restoring some of the private law areas and reduce, let me say the public law, the government intervention areas.
So the battle between left and right that we were so much accustomed to has become more sophisticated.
It is now going on over the question, who defines the center in the right way, and so we have a new center and an old center, a left center and a right center, but they all are built on a basic consensus, namely that a society without a market core is impossible.
