<HEADLINE>
on EMU and NATO decisions
<P>
HAMBURG: Politicians are famous for irresolution.
Occasionally, however, they use a device that forces them to stick to their promises -- the deadline.
In journalism if you miss a deadline, your article will not be published.
In politics, fixed deadlines become a force for resolution, often independent of the wisdom of the decision for which a deadline was set.
<P>
Two recent examples, both of vital importance to the future structure of Europe, exemplify the advantages and risk in "deadline" diplomacy: Nato expansion and introduction of a common European currency, EMU.
<P>
No formal date for Nato enlargement exists, but with every statement from Western leaders, the date for opening the alliance to East Europe's democracies moves closer.
In January 1994, Nato's leaders accepted in principle that the alliance should not be a closed shop.
A year later, foreign ministers began to study the modalities of enlargement.
These were completed last autumn.
All country's interested in Nato expansion have been informed of these findings.
In the next half-year or so, Nato must tackle the thorniest question: whom to admit, and when.
True, no date has been fixed.
But Nato has by now issued so many political IOUs that it cannot delay honoring them much longer.
<P>
As for EMU, the date is set: on January 1, 1999 EU members that meet the conditions for EMU membership will transfer monetary authority to the new European Central Bank and within 3 years replace their national currencies with a new European currency the "Euro".
<P>
Both Nato enlargement and EMU remain controversial.
Yet the fact that dates have been set -- explicitly in the latter, implicitly in the former -- provides momentum for going ahead.
<P>
Opening Nato eastward has been a matter of dispute since the USSR's collapse.
Originally, only few Western governments supported the idea; most worried that such a move would isolate and irritate Russia.
Since then, Moscow has made it clear that it would regard Nato expansion eastward as an unfriendly act.
And apart from the risk of rousing Russian anger, there is a danger that, because Nato will admit only a few new members at first, how can it avoid consigning the remaining countries to a Russian zone of influence?
<P>
Western leaders are aware that an expansion aimed at improving European stability may indeed produce new strains.
Yet the option of retreating from the project is no longer open to them.
To postpone enlargement beyond 1997 would not only disappoint eager East Europeans, it would confirm a widespread notion in Moscow that the West will always bend to pressure.
By abandoning a policy that has become a bedrock of post Cold War strategy, the West would lose both credibility and authority, in Europe and beyond.
The damage caused by not meeting the self-imposed deadline would be much greater than the problems enlargement would create.
<P>
The same is true for EMU.
Good reasons to delay exist.
It is still not certain if the two countries central to its success, France and Germany, will meet the conditions for participation.
Even if they do, the group of countries in which the Euro will be introduced will be much smaller than the total membership of the EU, thus making it more difficult to maintain the common market.
It is also not at all clear how a common currency can work without a common economic government.
In the current economic slowdown in Western Europe, moreover, it may be better to stimulate economies by increasing public spending rather than curtailing expenditures for the sake of meeting the conditions of EMU membership.
Under these circumstances, would it not be best to postpone the ambitious plan of the common currency until much later?
<P>
Many economists and politicians are calling for just that.
Their warnings are likely to be fruitless because failure to meet the deadline would be much riskier than all the risks of going ahead.
Postponement amounts to giving up the project.
Once governments fail to meet the date they set for themselves in a formal treaty, international financial markets would not believe that they could make a later date stick, either.
Markets would be convinced that the "Euro" was a pipe dream and will speculate heavily in favor of Europe's strongest currency, the D-mark, driving up its value and driving down Germany's exports.
Currency relations throughout Europe would be thrown into utter confusion
<P>
Here not only the common currency but that of European integration would be dealt a fatal blow.
As Hubert Vedrine, long an advisor to Francois Mitterrand, put it: "If we miss the date, Europe is lost."
<P>
In both the case of Nato enlargement and EMU, therefore, deadlines will have to be met because they have been set.
The damage of not enlarging Nato soon just as the damange of not introducing the "Euro" in January 1999 will far outweigh anything that might be gained by delay.
When governments commit themselves to take action by a specific date, they have tied their hands.
