<HEADLINE>
Requiem for a Heavyweight
<P>
CAMBRIDGE: After World War II, Winston Churchill suffered a resounding defeat at the polls.
In the long perspective of history, that setback was an inconsequential footnote to Churchill’s reputation.
Much the same will be true of Chancellor Helmut Kohl, who was just ousted in no uncertain terms by German voters.
<P>
Kohl has played an extraordinary role that will remain in the history books for centuries.
The fleeting humiliation of an electoral defeat is just a footnote that was by and large inevitable.
After all, no great democratic leader, it seems, can let go before he is let go of by the voters first.
<P>
Kohl accomplished two great economic/political deeds: unification and European Union.
Those actions changed the face of Europe forever, and for the good.
Inserting an economically dominant Germany into the EU meant heading off a quest for hegemony that, as in the past, could have gone badly wrong.
<P>
The same can be said of unification.
Kohl himself often eagerly recounts a moment when, standing on a balcony in Berlin, he received an urgent message from Gorbachev.
"If your tanks roll," the Kremlin leader said, "so will ours."
Tanks did not roll, the undoing of communism proceeded apace and in peace, extending ultimately into Russia.
<P>
Unification needed very cool heads at a time when people in the street were grabbing for all the freedom they could, as if communism’s collapse was a foregone conclusion.
It wasn’t.
If not for the special Kohl/Gorbachev relationship, unification might not have happened; we could have had uprisings and repressions, as in the 1950s.
<P>
Whatever the quarrels about EMU, and the genuine questions about its costs and benefits, there is no question that the European Union is an outstanding achievement.
Europe’s moves toward stronger integration, the internal market, and common money are all to the good.
Europe has major problems, but there are also extraordinary advantages of an increasingly large and competitive market.
It took stubborn insistence to hang in, fight, and make EMU happen.
Kohl delivered just that.
Without him, the world currency crisis would now be knocking out Italy and perhaps even France.
As it is, both are basking in the aftermath of interest rate cuts.
<P>
Much of the discontent in Germany has to do with the here and now.
Some with his eye on the next century might well neglect the here and now of interest to voters - jobs and feel-good rhetoric.
Schröeder filled the vacuum: it is always easy for a broad alliance focussing on the immediate, and promising what it cannot deliver, to oust someone who has been around too long and has lost the will of being genuinely dishonest with the utmost sincerity.
The Red/Green alliance will make the headlines much less with its accomplishments and much more with its quarrels, disagreements, and ultimate break-up.
<P>
Kohl might have engineered a soft landing, letting the next generation step in rather than his party being kicked out.
He failed in that, but not necessarily for the worse.
What has happened now is much better: the left gets a chance to discredit itself, the right can get a moment to rethink an agenda for the center.
The next election will throw its weight to genuine reformers on either side.
<P>
Chancellor Schröeder is still flirting with a third way.
Yes, there is one, but it is a dead end street.
The world economy holds out extraordinary promise, but also very substantial stress and tension.
Europe now, more than ever, needs to take an active part in managing the world economy.
Europe needs a leader to shape that role.
Even before he has started, it is increasingly doubtful that Mr. Schröeder can fill that job description.
