<HEADLINE>
Russian Interests In Europe
<P>
MOSCOW: Any analyst who dares define the national interests of a country caught in a decade of near revolutionary upheaval should be suspected of intellectual adventurism.
Yet today, more than ever, it is necessary for Russians, and for Russia's neighbors, to understand what motivates so vast a country.
Despite the transitional nature of so much of Russian life nowadays, a new consensus about Russian national interests is visibly emerging.
<P>
Consensus could soon fall apart, particularly if communists win the presidency or if severe political infighting resumes.
But even if either event comes to pass, some of the elements of this consensus will stick, for they reflect lasting changes in and around Russia.
<P>
Many elements in this set of interests are traditional; a notion both reassuring -- Russia is becoming predictable, at last -- and troubling.
Two new elements, however, influence policy (and thinking about policy in Russia) and shed new light on these old interests: The pluralization and democratization of Russian politics.
More voices and interests need to be accommodated.
Should groups like the communists try to shove the country in a dangerous direction, large sectors in society would simply balk.
<P>
To define Russia's interests, begin with the basics: securing national independence and unity.
Today, no one threatens Russia's independence, despite paranoid rants to the contrary.
Threats to territorial integrity, acute just three years ago, have been eliminated, though vestiges are being dealt with in an ugly way -- witness Chechnya.
<P>
Territorial security is directly related to improved economic security, prosperity and evolving relations with Europe.
But continental integration clashes with a powerful trend in Russia: reintegration with Kazakhstan and Belarus, at almost any cost with the latter.
To be sure, with Belarus on its side Russia achieves a vital goal -- restoring uninhibited transport links, including those for gas and oil, to Europe.
Belarussian ties also serve a less vital, but still important interest: inhibiting Ukraine from becoming a semi-hostile buffer against Russia.
If Kiev's leadership ever attempts such a policy (which defies the vital interests of Ukraine, too), they would find their country isolated strategically because of the reabsorption of Belarus.
<P>
Preventing domination of the states to Russia's south by another power is also vital.
That threat is small but worrying when tied to an even older fear: emergence of an unfriendly encircling coalition.
But a corollary to this interest -- one widely accepted -- requires that Russia not provoke by its actions or inaction the creation of such a force.
<P>
These relations are complicated by Russia's role in protecting the 20 million Russians who now live outside Russia's borders.
Governments everywhere assume a special role in protecting ethnic or national brethren who reside outside the homeland.
Russia is no different, save that its role as a guardian is deeply entwined with maintaining the society's emerging democracy.
<P>
At the heart of Russian interests, and the focus of policy discussion, is a Continental security system.
Here a simple rule applies: when pushed out of Europe Moscow inevitably pushes herself in.
<P>
This is why prevention or at least a postponement of NATO expansion is so important.
Expansion of NATO, if not seconded by the emergence of a robust pan-European security system would make Russia an outcast from the Continent's security architecture.
Such isolation breeds instability.
Cooperation with an expanded NATO will be no compensation, and will not salve the wounds.
<P>
NATO expansion, indeed, creates two challenges to European security.
Shifting NATO's border east immediately puts on the agenda the issue of who comes next.
Rivalry over the Baltic states and Ukraine would begin.
This struggle risks becoming more destabilizing than debates over expansion of NATO to the three or four Central European states.
Before expansion is contemplated, Russian rapprochement with key European institutions must be sealed.
As the European Union, despite all its difficulties, embodies the Continent's future, Russia must be integrated with it so that Europe's future will be about trade, capital and technological flows, not defense and security.
<P>
Russian interests concerning NATO, harsh rhetoric to the contrary, are ambiguous.
On one hand, Russia has never been more interested in NATO's survival.
It is hard even to pretend that NATO is a serious military threat.
Moreover, Russia in this time of weakness is interested in keeping the U.S. engaged in Europe, if only to balance Germany's potential might.
Moscow is also interested in retaining multiple centers of power in Europe: facing only the EU, benevolent as it may be, is the sort of non-choice most Russians want to avoid.
<P>
As to the former USSR, most members of Russia's elite desire a web of links and interests.
This instinct remains tenuous, because Russia oscillates in emphasizing the multilateral or the bilateral.
Russia, however, is clearly uninterested in forging a Warsaw Pact type arrangement for the CIS.
Against whom would such an alliance be aimed?
Certainly such an alliance would be unnerving to neighbors and costly to boot.
Russia would assume most of the burden.
Potential allies are far too poor.
<P>
Integration with most or some of the CIS is seen, however, as vital to rebuilding Russian influence in Europe.
It is hard to judge, though, whether and how such integration could increase Moscow influence, especially in the immediate future.
Integration with Belarus is often believed to be a clear benefit to Russian security, but the economic costs of this link may overwhelm this gain.
<P>
Only a year ago, East European questions were on the back burner of Russian policy.
Even the red button issue of NATO was more hot air than heated discussion.
It was even argued that theses nations are small markets, could not be a source of capital or technology, and (except for Poland) have always been a means, not an end, in Russian policy.
<P>
That view is changing.
Today, Russia is coming to grips with its real size, slowly doing away with globalism, becoming more modest and thus more European.
And in Europe neighbors matter.
All the more that maturation of the foreign policy outlook is not confined only to Moscow.
Prague, Warsaw, Bratislava, and Sofia are also showing hints that they understand that living between East and West, is dangerous if you are balanced on only one foot.
