<HEADLINE>
Russia Pulled East And West
<P>
MOSCOW: Interrelations between Russia and Asia; Russia's partial Asian heritage and geography: both incite longstanding debates within and without the country.
These have been renewed, not only due to the looming expansion of NATO which partly excludes Russia from Europe's security order, but also because of the swift, brutal development of Russian capitalism, which makes Russia unique in Europe and Asia.
<P>
Traditional Russofobes (and some Europeans) try to prove that Russia is not and cannot be a European country.
In Russia these voices are seconded by backward and leftist elements who cry that Russia should abandon Western democracy and capitalism and take the "Chinese Road", meaning an authoritarian way to economic growth.
<P>
Following a legacy initiated by Peter the Great, Russian westernizers promote Russia as a European power, albeit backward, but on the road to normalcy.
Feeling rejected by Europe, however, many Russians are turning eastward toward a strategic alliance with China.
But this impulse is superfluous as friendly relations with China are a must for Russia, both strategically and economically, irrespective of relations with the West.
<P>
Incapable (so far) of forging a cohesive cordial strategy, with China, the West is becoming visibly afraid of Russo-Chinese rapprochement -- despite the obvious limits of it.
For China does not need allies because it is becom ing so mighty, and Russia is uninterested in appearing threatening, a posture that it would assume with too close an alliance with China.
<P>
While announcing time and again the need for economic penetration into the Far East, Moscow does little to spur its Pacific trade.
Russia's Siberian provinces trade mostly raw materials with Asian powers, but Russia as a whole is doing so less and less.
The notion that Russia could become a bridge between Europe and Asia is also vanishing because transport costs between the country's western and eastern half are too high to attract outside commerce.
<P>
Potential dangers that exist between the two countries are hidden by the urge to trade.
Almost no attention is paid by Moscow to the huge, largely illegal, inflow of Chinese immigrants into the scarcely populated Russian Far East -- an immigration amounting to something like three million people in the past three years.
At the same time Russia is selling billions of dollars worth of sophisticated weaponry to China, whose rearmament, despite the absence of serious threats or enemies, is perhaps the highest in the world.
Lenin, indeed, once said that capitalists would sell rope to those who would hang them.
Democratic Russia may one day regret that it did not remember this Leninist proverb.
<P>
Contradictions abound in Russia's Central Asian policy, too.
Most Central Asian states are mired in feudal socialism or feudal capitalism, while Russia -- despite imperfections -- moves towards capitalism and democracy.
This trend mocks Moscow's professed desire for reintegration.
Russia's wary military involvement in Tadjikistan's civil war is driven by a simple consideration: the desire to prevent the spread of an Afghanlike chaos decease and thus the destabilization of the whole area.
<P>
Oil comprises a separate question.
Here Russia plays a complicated game of old-style geopolitics with other major powers and their oil companies who, while condemning "Russian imperialism", engage in the old imperial oil game with gusto.
For geostrategic but also economic reasons, Russia wants a piece of the Caspian oil.
Primarily, Russia needs to control the flow of oil from the area.
In this, Russia has two trump cards to play:
<P>
* First, unlike oil companies or the countries of Central Asia, Russia is relatively uninterested in the early development of regional oil fields.
Russia has vast untapped oil reserves of its own, and prefers investment in them.
Even though Lukoil and other Russian energy firms do want a piece of the Caspian oil profits, Russia can wait years, if not decades, for these to materialize.
<P>
* Second, without an active, stabilizing role by Russia, no one would seriously invest in the area.
Even a lukewarm Russian attitude would block massive investments.
This ambivalence is part of a pattern.
<P>
Today, most Russian elites feel themselves not only European but, I believe, too European.
Fixated on Europe, they forget that they live in Moscow or Irkutk, not Paris or Budapest.
Culturally we are predominantly European, but 8% of our population is Moslem, and we inherited a lot from Asia: co-citizens, cuisine, cultural traits, and a common history.
Many new Russians, working like machines 16 hours a day, seven days a week, look at their more relaxed Western counterparts with the contempt often found in the tiger economies of Asia.
"It's not America, you have to work here"-- is a popular joke.
<P>
This joke has a serious side: Russia is returning its historic, Janus-like position --- looking east and west simultaneously.
Neither Asian, nor European, this middle ground is not mere compromise, it is the authentic Russia.
The author of this piece, indeed, is by birth a Russian from the Slavic north and Jewish, one who is by culture and education a Russian Westernizer.
But my name -- Karaganov -- is translated from the Turkish as "black khan".
Here, writ small, is a mixture not to be shied away from but to be pleased with.
Indeed, it is this unique blend and cultural openness which makes Russia unique and perpetually interesting.
