<HEADLINE>
Russia And NATO
<P>
HAMBURG: The Balkan War, now in its fourth winter, has had many victims: hundreds of thousands of dead, millions of refugees, millions of human beings dehumanized, as well as the credibility of all the organizations created to prevent conflict in Europe: the European Union, the CSCE, the UN and now NATO.
Ironically, it also put the question of NATO’s Eastward extension back on the agenda.
<P>
It is an irony because the Western Alliance finds itself in deep crisis as a result of its failure to employ its still enormous military might to further a Balkan settlement.
After all, when the walls had come down all over Eastern Europe in 1989 and 1990 this Alliance of Western Europe and North America had seemed victorious and, when the Soviet Union fell apart a year later, could proudly claim to be the only functioning multilateral security organization on the continent.
But when the Balkan War presented the first test for proving the claim, NATO showed all the determination and muscle of a paper tiger.
While the old Soviet threat had united its sixteen members, the new threats, it turned out, divided them.
Today the best hope of the Western powers for an end to the conflict lies in the man who started it all: Serbia’s President Milocevic who is being urged to increase the pressure in the Bosnian Serbs tp accept the Contract Group’s plan for Bosnia-Herzegovina.
<P>
There are those who argue that Bosnia is a special case.
NATO, US Secretary of State Warren Christopher likes to say, is more important than Bosnia.
But this is wishful thinking, What we are seeing on the Balkans has all the elements of future conflicts in Europe: a war not between states but within them; a conflict that does not immediately threaten NATO states but undermines stability on their periphery and thus weakens their security as well as their cohesion; a frightening precedent for the successful use of military force to gain territory and expell populations.
Bosnia is no special case.
It is what insecurity in Europe outside of NATO will be about, and the Western Alliance has just demonstrated its irrelevance to that problem.
<P>
So why then should a weakened security pact now be a likelier candidate for enlargement?
For two reasons, one in the East, the other in the west.
<P>
For those countries in Central and Eastern Europe keen to join the Western security club, the Bosnian experience has underlined that only full membership will meet their security needs.
If you want to be protected, you have to be in the club, not outside it.
Had the former Yugoslavia been a NATO member, this would not necessarily have prevented the disintegration of the country into several sovereign republics.
But it would in all probability have prevented dissolution turning into bloody conflict.
The Yugoslav army would have been integrated into NATO’s military system and unable to be used by a reckless Serb leader to gain territory at the expense of the other republics.
And the full weight of NATO’s diplomatic efforts would have concentrated on working out a peaceful divorce, just as it has many times dealt with tensions between Greece and Turkey.
Hence to be in is to be safe - not only protected against a potential outside aggressor but also against the ravages of internal wars.
<P>
This applies not just to NATO but to the European Union as well.
Last year, Horst Teltschick, for many years foreign and security adviser to Germany’s Chancellor Kohl and now a successful businessman, suggested in a debate on why the West failed in Yugoslavia that the disaster might have been prevented by membership in the Union.
It was, of course, a hypothetical case; no West European government at the time would have been willing to accept post-Tito Yugoslavia into the EU (or rather the EC as it was then called.)
And thus there were many in the audience who smiled condescendingly at Teltschick’s suggestion, amused that this outstanding former foreign policy expert had lost his grasp.
<P>
And yet the basic idea is absolutely right.
Just as NATO, the EU is impotent in interfering in military conflicts beyond the area of its own membership.
Within that area, both are powerful in suppressing violent conflict.
While the EU has at least some means - like preferential trade agreements and associations - to export something of its own stability to neighboring countries, NATO as a security alliance has no such means.
For countries seeking its protective umbrella, the choice is only between in or out, not in between.
It would be astonishing if the leaders of East European countries would read the lessons of the Balkan War otherwise.
They will, therefore, intensify their effort to get into the Western security club as soon as possible.
<P>
That is one consequence of NATO’s Bosnian failure: The countries applying for membership are becoming more determined, more impatient.
(Has the Russian government which opposes both NATO’s enlargement and NATO’s interference in the Balkans been blind to the inherent contradiction?)
The other consequence is that the Western Alliance itself will now have to address the issue much more constructively and actively, for the sake of its own survival.
<P>
For the Bosnian experience has shown that outside threats of the indirect type now most likely cannot tie this Alliance together.
On the contrary, these threats will expose its disunity.
Manfred Worner, NATO’s Secretary General until his death last August, used to warn in private that the Alliance would not survive another Yugoslavia; it already has been severely wounded by the present conflict.
Nor is the kind of threat which brought NATO into existence and secured its cohesion likely to re-emerge.
Russia is not the Soviet Union, and while cautious military planners cannot exclude that this Euro-Asian great power could one day raise old fears in a suspicious Europe, it is extremely difficult to imagine that Russia, with her immense internal problems and her efforts of reform, can once again become the kind of menace that could unite the Western alliance in new determination and consensus, like the famous spinach does for Popeye the Sailor.
To wait for the big threat is no answer to NATO’s problems, on the contrary, it would be a fatal error.
<P>
The only way to demonstrate Atlantic cohesion to its own members and to the world outside is to commit itself to a common project.
The most important, most promising is to extend NATO’s membership Eastward without antagonizing Russia.
It is, as NATO’s new Secretary General Willy Claes has said in his inaugural statement last October, "a historic duty."
It is also a task which the Alliance must undertake to stay alive.
Therefore, President Clinton is right in trying to move NATO beyond the ambiguous, "Partnership for Peace" concept.
By the end of next year, the Alliance will have defined the nature and the obligations of membership in such a way that talks can be started with applicant countries.
Before the end of the century, NATO’s membership will amount to 18 plus X.
<P>
This does, of course, raise the problem of Russia.
Russia cannot join NATO without destroying NATO, hence all talk about that eventuality are eyewash.
Nor can Russia be treated like just another "Partner for Peace".
Since Russia does not fit into any of the existing organizations, a new one should be created - a Russia-NATO Forum.
This would have to be a formal arrangement, designed to allow for day-to-day dialogue and consultation and capable of establishing a tradition of close security cooperation.
For this, it would have to have all the trimmings of a proper international Institution - two Secretary Generals, a political and a military committee, a council of permanent representatives etc.
Thus Russia’s need for status would be respected, and NATO’s eastward extension could even less be misconstrued in Moscow as an anti-Russia strategy.
<P>
"Partnership for Peace" had two major deficiencies: it committed NATO neither to enlargement nor to developing a cooperative strategy vis-a-vis Russia.
For this reason, Russian suspicions against the "Partnership" concept are perfectly understandable, and even President Yeltsin’s outburst at the Budapest CSCE Summit deserves some sympathy.
If NATO moves ahead with enlargement, it must also take seriously the task of establishing an institutionalized dialogue with the Russian Federation.
Both must go together.
<P>
Bosnia has exposed NATO’s weaknesses.
Yet for those who want to join, the war in the Balkans has also increased its attractiveness.
And those who already are its members can now no longer delay what they have sought to avoid for too long: to make enlargement possible without isolating Russia.
If they should continue to play for time, the victim will not just be stability in Eastern Europe but the Atlantic Alliance itself.
