<HEADLINE>
Shock Therapy for Russia’s Bureaucrats
<P>
CAMBRIDGE: All the postcommunist countries that implemented radical reforms, except for Russia, began to see rapid growth by 1994, at the latest.
Russia’s GDP, on the other hand, fell in 1995 and 1996.
So why hasn’t the Russian economy benefited from the kind of liberalization that worked so well elsewhere?
<P>
The answer is that the benefits of shock therapy depend critically on how well the government itself makes the transition from overseeing a communist regime to supporting a market economy.
While other countries which pursued radical reform, such as Poland, are now advancing smartly in their political transition, reform of Russia’s political system has barely nudged forward.
It is this tardiness in the transformation of government that shackles economic growth.
<P>
One element key to helping smooth the operations of a market economy is the creation of institutions and laws protecting private property.
Another is depoliticization.
Although shock therapy, with price liberalization, stabilization, and privatization, greatly diminished the extent to which the Kremlin controls Russia’s economy, remnants of the massive communist bureaucracy remain.
Politicians continue to exercise overweening sway, especially on the local level, and they abuse their regulatory powers to enrich themselves and assist their political allies.
This kind of behavior, along with a lack of private property protection, is devastating for growth.
<P>
At the core of Russia’s political backwardness is the structure of incentives that drive the behavior of local and regional officials.
While the incentives in other postcommunist countries, primarily East European, nowadays reward local officials when they promote business growth, the incentives facing Russia’s bureaucrats work in the opposite way.
<P>
Elections are the primary incentive for growth given to politicians in Poland and other fast growing postcommunist countries.
The ballot box makes officials accountable to voters, especially on the local level.
Because communities prosper only if local businesses do, officials need to take business interests into account if they want to be elected, and re-elected.
<P>
Elections also promote the turnover of hidebound old communist elites, which usually lack both the skills and experience needed to promote through politics the smooth operation of markets.
Today in Poland, indeed, old party hacks are increasingly replaced by a younger crowd who have a taste for both democratic give-and-take and the market economy.
<P>
Another key to providing effective incentives is fiscal autonomy for local governments.
In Poland, local governments raise their own tax revenues and are able to spend most of it as they see fit.
Because politicians who credibly offer to provide more public goods have a greater chance of getting elected, fiscal autonomy gives government officials a real stake in raising the tax base through sound policies.
Fostering the prosperity of the local business community is the best way to nurture a local economy’s vitality.
Thus, both political oversight and fiscal autonomy provide the incentives needed to support small businesses, which are the engines of economic growth in all fast growing postcommunist countries.
<P>
Unlike their Polish counterparts, Russian officials respond to the wrong set of incentives.
Local elections have not been consistently held since 1992, when Yeltsin appointed all mayors and governors.
This lack of electoral oversight undermines Russia’s emerging market economy in many ways.
<P>
Overregulation is one.
Evidence from a survey of shop managers in Poland and Russia suggests that Russians are much more subject to red tape than the Poles.
They are also more likely to be hit with fines.
And Russia’s local government officials, being mostly appointed, do not expect to keep their posts if elections are held, so they grab what they can when they can.
Russian businessmen routinely complain about multiple permits, inspections, registrations, all requiring encounters with a myriad of officials, many demanding bribes before necessary documents are issued.
<P>
Combine all this with the heavy small business taxes imposed by both federal and local bureaucrats, and the huge size of Russia’s underground economy, estimated to account for between 30% to 50% of gross domestic income is easily explained.
Going underground makes perfect sense if you are a business keen to survive, but it depresses tax revenues, wrecks public finances and restricts expenditures on such much needed items as police protection, education and welfare.
<P>
Fiscal autonomy, too, is largely missing in Russia.
Two thirds of local government’s tax revenues comes from their share in the taxes collected by the central government.
Moreover, while this share is in theory fixed, in practice it is negotiated.
Regional governments cut deals with Moscow, and regional governors must bargain with local governments.
The effects of such fiscal federalism are perverse.
Governors and mayors have few incentives to broaden their tax bases and instead devote their energies to negotiating about their budget.
<P>
What needs to be done in order for Russia to join the group of fast-growing postcommunist economies is clear.
Russia’s reformers must accelerate the pace of political reforms aimed at unleashing the forces of electoral oversight and fiscal autonomy at the local level.
Such reforms, together with the creation of functional bureaucracies and of institutions supporting the rule of law, will bring the Russian people the economic rewards they have been awaiting for far too long.
