<HEADLINE>
Six Million Serfs
<P>
TEL AVIV: The handover of Hong Kong from Britain to China (barely one month old) went beyond the merely political to become a spectacular pageant, celebrating both the return of a lost territory to the Motherland as well as a symbolic end to what was the world’s most far-flung Empire.
Hence the strange mixture of emotions during the event, leaving the whole spectacle to hover somewhat uncertainly between Verdi’s Aida and Wagner’s Gotterdammerung.
<P>
Yet among all the speeches and fireworks of this TV extravaganza, one aspect was totally overlooked: the political will of the six million citizens of the British Crown Colony, now transferred -- without ever having been consulted in any way -- from an imperial, albeit recently liberal, colonial rule to that of the largest non-democratic and repressive regime in the world today.
That deliberate, and deliberately undemocratic, oversight, is one of the most worrying precedents set by the return of Hong Kong to Chinese control.
<P>
The major terms of reference overshadowing the Sino-British negotiations which led to the 1984 handover agreement were the conditions set down in the 19th century lease through which Britain acquired most of the territory of the colony of Hong Kong (of which, the major portion of the land was actually on mainland China), having gained the initial imperial foothold on Hong Kong island itself through sheer force in two Opium Wars.
In the agreement hammered out by Mr. Deng and Mrs. Thatcher in the early 1980s, Britain appears to have gained some guarantees about the continued existence of Hong Kong’s freewheeling capitalist economy even under Beijing’s rule (‘one country, two systems’ is the vague, if celebrated, expression coined by Mr. Deng).
But nowhere did the expression of the political will of the Hong Kong inhabitants themselves come into the power equation.
<P>
Hong Kong’s people were never asked: Would they be interested in ‘returning’ to a Communist China which many of them have fled over the decades of Communist rule?
Would they perhaps prefer independence or some sort of internationally guaranteed autonomous, self-governing status?
Or would they perhaps even have preferred, God forbid, to retain some nexus to the British Crown as a self-ruling dependency?
<P>
We do not know the answer to these questions, and never will -- because the people of Hong Kong were never asked.
In an era when decolonization continues, with the principle of self-determination considered sacrosanct from Bosnia to Chechnya, and from the Baltics to the Palestinians -- it is indeed incredible that six million people were transferred from one set of rulers to another like mere chattel.
Russian aristocrats used to sell whole villages and estates, including their peasant serfs, as if the latter were inanimate objects, not human beings.
Similar transactions happened also on the international level in the past (think of the divisions of Poland in the 19th century, or Yalta in 1945); but in the age of decolonization, this is indeed an anomaly.
<P>
Moreover, this anomaly is compounded by the bitter irony that the British Prime Minister who handed these six million ‘souls’ (to use the old Russian term for such serfs) to Beijing was the same Iron Lady who valiantly went to war only two years earlier, in 1982, to free 12,000 settlers in the Falkland Islands from being occupied by the generals from Buenos Aires.
No such considerations about the right not to be ruled against their own will appeared to apply to the 6,000,000 inhabitants of Hong Kong.
Is this because the Falkland Islanders were white and British, whereas the people in Hong Kong were ‘merely’ Chinese?
<P>
Once can understand the common interests of China and Britain: China is obsessed with an absolute territorial imperative: to restore what it considers to be the one and indivisible Chinese Motherland; Britain is obsessed with trade and commerce with China -- just as it was during the Opium Wars.
Back then, the instrument guaranteeing Britain free trade in the China market was a gunboat; today it is the total disregard of the fundamental rights of six million people.
While Chinese raison d’etat and British commercial interest are clear, it is less clear why public opinion everywhere in the world did not raise the issue of the self-determination of the Hong Kong population.
Are 19th century treaties dealing with territory so clearly superior to considerations of basic human rights?
<P>
Here is the root flaw accompanying the Hong Kong handover, and it is one which sets a precedent others may one day regret.
It is obvious that British rule had to go: it is equally obvious that China had legitimate territorial claims.
But the total disregard for the wishes of Hong Kong residents leaves a heavy blot on the entire process.
Perhaps the haunting tune of the lament of the Hebrew slaves in Babylon from Verdi’s opera Nabucco would, after all, have been the most fitting accompaniment to the transfer ceremonies, not the Chinese triumphalism and imperial nostalgia whose strange, chilly mix characterized that midnight pageant.
