<HEADLINE>
Taming Rogue States
<P>
HAMBURG: Little frustrates parents more than a child that refuses to behave.
Few challenges irritate modern states as much as countries that contravene the basic conventions of international conduct.
But even more than parents of naughty children, the international community is often helpless in dealing with "rogue states" that refuse to conform.
Like ill-tempered parents, it may also lose its cool.
<P>
The Islamic Republic of Iran is today’s chief rogue.
Iran makes no bones about its desire to undermine the regimes of the Persian Gulf.
It supports terrorists around the world.
Only last April, a Berlin court concluded that Iran’s top leaders ordered the 1992 murders in Germany of four Iranian opposition leaders, and American investigators of the bomb attack on a US base in Saudi Arabia last summer seem convinced that here, too, Iran lit the fuse.
Although party to the Non-Proliferation Treaty, Iran seeks technologies useful to building a nuclear device.
<P>
Like an old-fashioned teacher, America argues that punishment is the best educator.
So Washington cancels diplomatic contacts, blocks US trade with Iran, and seeks international economic sanctions.
If an element of revenge for the past humiliations America suffered from Iran intrudes, one cannot deny America’s logic: if a country refuses to play by the rules, it must suffer for it.
<P>
Europe and Japan, on the other hand, argue like modern pedagogues.
A naughty child is only cured by dialogue and example.
Because Europe and Japan are Iran’s major trading partners, instinct, inclination, and interests lead them to resist isolating Iran as the US urges.
EU countries even refused to sever diplomatic relations after the Berlin verdict; true, with the exception of Greece, they recalled their ambassadors briefly, but more to placate their publics than impress Iran’s mullahs.
<P>
Hardliners in Iran rejoice.
They feel confirmed in their belief that, for most Western governments, outrage over Iran’s terrorist activities counts less than the lure of business.
And they watch with glee at how Europe, Japan, and America, instead of acting together, display the weakness of disunity.
<P>
Should a rogue state be allowed to get away with its provocations?
The trouble is: in most cases it will.
The instruments of coercion that states dispose of short of military intervention are imperfect and, to be remotely efficient, require a degree of international solidarity that is only generated in exceptional circumstances.
When the US cut off trade with Iran, even close allies were only too ready to intensify theirs; when Germany recalled its ambassador from Tehran because Iran’s leaders had been implicated in a murder plot, some European partners grasped this opportunity to promote their business ties with Iran at Germany’s expense.
Joint military action against a state of Iran’s size will only materialize (if at all) in response to a major threat.
Iranian hired killers murdering Iranian dissidents, however despicable, do not constitute such a threat.
<P>
That is why the US argument -- that if America, Japan, and Europe act in harmony Iran will be forced to change its ways -- is merely theoretical.
But Europe’s argument that Iran will be more cooperative if America joins the dialogue is merely naive.
As US Secretary of State Madeleine Albright told Nato colleagues: "Your critical dialogue has not worked.
But our uncritical silence doesn’t seem to have accomplished that much either."
<P>
From the European perspective, a new common strategy must maintain the minimal dialogue that diplomatic relations represent.
Western governments seem to have forgotten that exchanging ambassadors is not a sign of approval for the policies of the host country.
Indeed, diplomatic relations are most important among nations that don’t see eye-to-eye.
Neither are they a means to reform naughty governments.
To keep ambassadors in place is no more and no less than an expression of self-interest.
Is it not in the interest of the West to maintain observers in the most populous nation of the Gulf, to convey western views directly, and to have communications in place should Iran be prepared to strike a deal?
<P>
From the US approach, the common Western strategy should adopt the principle of quid-pro-quo: If Iran wants favors -- like credits, lifting of trade sanctions -- it will need to earn them.
This is very different from current US policy -- blanket condemnation and a cut-off in relations.
Instead, it requires a specific definition of what Iran must do in order to get what it wants in return, as well a fixed list of disadvantages it will suffer should transgressions continue.
The more general the accusations, demands, or threats, the less effective they will be.
Lack of specificity also discourages any accommodating response from Tehran by exposing even the most modest move to hardline attacks of kowtowing to the great Satan.
<P>
So the best approach to a rogue state is to get the message across that cooperation pays and obstruction costs.
For that, channels of communication must be open, and the relationship between what is expected and what is offered in return must be stated unequivocally.
<P>
Will this tame Iran?
Nobody knows.
But this program at least provides a basis for international action and a yardstick for assessing Iran’s reaction.
It may even lead, through an accumulation of isolated successes, to a reintegration of Iran into the world community.
<P>
True, a rational strategy requires rational governments.
As calls in the US intensify in clamoring for military retaliation against Iran for its assumed involvement in the attacks on the US barracks in Dahran, Saudi Arabia last year, the sober assessment of the West’s strategy that Madeleine Albright seems to favor may be derailed.
Imagine US planes bombing Iranian oil fields in an act of retaliation.
Iran would likely respond by attacking vulnerable Saudi installations.
No one could be sure where the action would stop.
No doubt Iran would suffer.
But in the end, nothing would be gained, and a crisis between Europe, Japan, and America would likely result.
The rogue would have the last laugh.
