<HEADLINE>
The Uruguay Of Europe?
<P>
STOCKHOLM: During the last two decades, Sweden lost its place among the world's rich countries.
Swedish competitiveness eroded and income growth slowed to a crawl.
To reverse this trend, Sweden needs radical reforms, with lower income taxes and opportunities for small companies to grow.
<P>
Sweden is not the first welfare state to collapse of its generousity.
At the beginning of this century Uruguay was the "Sweden of Latin America" -- introducing the 8 hour work day in 1915, free high schools in 1916, and state pensions in 1919.
It was one of the richest countries in the world.
Uruguay's downfall began after World War II.
Growth decreased and then it stopped.
In the mid-1980s, income per capita (in fixed prices) was the same as it had been in 1955.
By that time, Uruguay had slipped to number 43 on the list of the world's richest countries.
<P>
What does this have to do with Sweden?
Not much, you might say, because Sweden is still rich and developed.
But Sweden, too, is on its way down the income list.
At its highpoint in 1975 Swedish per capita income was eleven per cent above the OECD average, and only slightly behind the Americans, the Swiss, and the Canadians.
Now Swedes are no longer among the top ten countries, but are six per cent below the average OECD income.
<P>
One similarity between Sweden and Uruguay is that neither believed free markets could create the development they desired.
By distorting incentives through taxes, regulations, and a runaway welfare state, both countries discouraged growth in their most productive sectors.
In Uruguay, agriculture was the leading sector; in Sweden, it was manufacturing.
<P>
The soils of Uruguayan pampas are among the most fertile in the world.
Export agriculture was the foundation of the country's wealth.
But the incomes from beef, mutton, and wool exports were not ploughed back into the agriculture.
Instead, they facilitated the expansion of an inefficient public sector, a protected manufacturing industry, and an urban metropolis -- Montevideo.
As time passed, the political power of the urban population outgrew that of the farmers.
Crisis emerged when world prices of agricultural produce collapsed and surpluses from agriculture could no longer support an inefficient manufacturing industry and growing welfare state.
But the strongest lobbies -- representing trade unions and other urban groups -- could not allow wage cuts and welfare reductions.
Manufacturing and government sectors remained large; inflation, budget deficits, and public debt began to grow.
<P>
In Sweden, wealth was based on manufacturing success.
Ingenious entrepreneurs, access to abundant natural resources, and the country's growth oriented economic policies contributed to creating a number of successful corporations that are among the world's largest multinationals: Volvo, Ericsson, SKF, Alfa Laval, SAAB, Scania, AGA, Electrolux.
<P>
Income from manufacturing made it possible to build the Swedish welfare state.
However, the Swedish social democratic governments tried to preserve the competitiveness of large firms by financing the growth of the welfare state without corporate taxes.
Instead, Sweden created a highly progressive tax system with the world's highest personal income taxes and the smallest dispersion in wage incomes net of taxes.
As a result, labor was taxed to stagnation -- hard work and education just didn't pay off.
Sweden also got the world's highest labor costs.
<P>
Swedish multinationals remained competitive, but expansion during the last decades took place abroad, where the supply of skilled labor was larger and the labor costs lower.
The problems with labor costs plagued the development of new enterprises, so that there were no small firms to take over when the big multinationals went overseas.
Sweden does not have fewer one-man enterprises today than other developed countries -- the problem is that most small enterprises can't afford to employ anyone but the owner.
<P>
Aside from high income taxes, it is clear that bias against small enterprises is one of the major weaknesses of Swedish policy.
Among the obstacles to the growth of small firms are labor market regulations, the power of the trade unions, competition laws, a cumbersome bureaucracy, and last, but not least, an imperfect capital market.
<P>
One important lesson from the comparison between Uruguay and Sweden is that higher standards of living cannot be created simply by redistributing existing assets.
Attempts to shift too much wealth from productive to non-productive sectors led to stagnation in both countries, with growing budget deficits, debt, and heavy unemployment.
<P>
Can Sweden reverse this negative trend and avoid becoming a second Uruguay?
Yes, but it must formulate new policies to create incentives for work and education and to facilitate the growth of small and medium-sized enterprises.
Politicians should not try to identify what kinds of education people need and what companies or sectors should be supported, but should let the market handle economic restructuring of this kind.
<P>
In the long run, Sweden cannot avoid reform.
The question is when such policy changes will take place.
In the case of Uruguay, it took 40 years to go from stagnation back to growth.
Swedish prospects seem better.
Today there is lively debate on institutions and incentives among economists and politicians, and several reforms, including a new tax system, have been introduced over the past few years.
However, restructuring is painful, and left-wing traditionalists recently gained public support.
If their proposed remedies -- expansion of the public sector and more government involvement in production -- are realized, it will be hard for Sweden to avoid Uruguay's fate.
If Swedish politicians have not learned from history, Sweden's people can look forward to another 20 years of stagnation.
