<HEADLINE>
The Strange Normality of Polish Elections
<P>
WARSAW: On September 21 Poland is to hold parliamentary elections that will be totally free.
A minimum of four (and perhaps as many as seven) parties may enter parliament.
Differences between the left and the right seem stark.
Given such "clear" choices, you would think that Polish voters should feel empowered.
Yet Poles are dissatisfied not only with their politics, but with the very sterility of democratic choice.
<P>
What is wrong?
What is missing?
One answer is obvious if you look at the structure of Polish party politics (a structure also visible in other postcommunist countries, such as Hungary).
A future majority in the Sejm (Parliament) can only be created by a coalition of no fewer than three parties.
Such coalition-building may seem normal in countries that adhere to the principle of proportional representation.
But in Poland voters feel cheated because the configuration of parties that will enter the various coalitions is entirely unpredictable.
In an earlier election many people voted for the liberal Union of Freedom party not because they agreed with its program but because they hated the rival Catholic and nationalist parties.
What happened after the elections?
A coalition of the Union of Freedom with the Catholics and the nationalists was formed.
<P>
When such coalitions of convenience are not only possible but common, voters who try to behave rationally are forced to confront the irrational outcomes of their own behavior.
They cannot foresee who will rule and what policies the government will pursue, even if their favorite party joins the governmental coalition.
But when anything is possible, and nothing is predictable, the act of voting becomes senseless and politics itself loses all meaning.
Voters are given their formal right of democratic choice, but are denied its substance.
Not surprisingly, this aberration of democracy incites widespread cynicism.
Seven years after communism’s end, sad to say, it is possible that no more than 40% of Poles will bother voting.
<P>
A second factor must also be taken into account if Polish politics are to be understood.
Today, we do have what might be called a "left," although its main representatives, the postcommunists, follow Britain’s new Labour prime minister Tony Blair in believing more strongly in a market economy than in extending social welfare.
A liberal, open minded, pro-market party -- the Union of Freedom headed by Leszek Balcerowicz, the architect of Poland’s economic renewal -- occupies the political center.
<P>
Stability on the left and in the center, chaos on the right.
Poland’s right is the political equivalent of the tower of Babel.
No clear program, no clear party system or discipline.
The right’s most famous figure, Lech Walesa, is a spent (if embittered) force, and there are only a few recognizable faces among the politicians who seek to step into his boots.
The right is both for and against Europe; for a market economy and for workers’ ownership; for a strong welfare state and lower taxes; for modernization of agriculture and the preservation of small family farms.
The right often invokes "traditional values," but as socialism is the only tradition anyone remembers, the right’s values turn out to be empty slogans -- "tradition," "family," and "Church" -- mouthed by its ambitious politicians.
<P>
In Poland, being on the right means simply being against the left.
Jan Maria Rokita, one of the most intelligent leaders of the right and a former home affairs minister, recently said that the Polish people already have all the human rights that liberalism can bestow.
What the country now needs, says Rokita, is the so-called "family rights" that are essentially conservative.
Fine phrasemaking, but what does it really mean?
Lacking any serious alternative to the despised political and economic program of the center and the left, right-wing politicians appear consigned to agitating on such divisive issues as pornography, divorce, and, of course, abortion.
<P>
And yet, despite its anonymity and incoherence, the right is potentially very powerful.
People are angry and tired with the postcommunists, and they do not feel at home in the overly intellectual and westernized Union of Freedom.
Many will therefore vote for the right despite their misgivings.
But others cannot embrace its glib populism, and are deeply troubled by the intellectual vacuum of the right’s campaign.
Perhaps half of all Poles belong to this group and many of them feel that the political system does not represent them.
<P>
In the long term, the right must become more structured and modern.
But what happens if it wins the coming elections (as seems likely at the moment)?
Unlike more established democracies, in which politics only effects the economy at the margins, Poland cannot coast along; it needs leadership from its politicians if the economic gains of the last few years are not to be wasted through lack of progress on privatization, fiscal and banking reform, and modernization of the legal system.
So voters cannot stroll to the right unworried about falling over the edge.
Even some rightist politicians are openly troubled by this possibility.
A right-wing victory now, they warn, would lead to a disaster: an inefficient, dangerously incoherent government failing within a year, leaving the economy in shreds.
<P>
There are no easy, quick prescriptions for this disease of Polish politics.
Small wonder, then, that so many Poles feel so depressed about the looming elections.
Whatever the outcome, whoever wins, the key decisions that must be taken appear likely to be either postponed once again or -- worse yet -- taken hastily by inexperienced politicians huddled in insecure and unprincipled coalitions, governments that our votes can neither influence nor control.
