<HEADLINE>
The Delusions of China's Growing Nationalism
<P>
BEJING: China has recently seen an upsurge of ultra-nationalism, all the more disturbing because of the way in which Party, state and military leaders have, by insisting that "hostile foreign forces" are arrayed against them, charged this nationalism with a xenophobia that is never far beneath the surface in modern Chinese history.
This August on the 50th anniversary of Japan's defeat in WWII, hard-line Politburo member Liu Huaging invoked memories of "successive and fierce aggression by imperialist powers" to insinuate that certain antagonistic countries "will not accept a powerful and prosperous China."
Flag pins have become popular.
Then on October 1st at a National Day speech in the Great Hall of the People Premier Li Peng defiantly proclaimed that "After shaking off imperialist bullying and persecution from various powerful nations, the long suffering Chinese people have been on the rise ever since."
More recently Taiwan is threatened with military maneuvers across the straights, even the firing of test missiles in its direction, whenever independence is suggested
<P>
Paradoxically, nationalist chest pounding is motivated not by the strength and confidence that Chinese leaders wish to project, but by deep-seated fear of weakness.
This fear derives from two sources: the Party's lawless governance and an awareness of the way in which society has been defoliated of the shared assumptions that normally give a nation cohesion.
First, Mao's revolution destroyed traditional values.
Then Deng's counter-revolution destroyed their Maoist replacements, leaving China adrift with only materialism providing a sense of direction.
The fact that after 45 years of Party rule China remains hostage to "great leader" kultur and that with a succession crisis looming there is no "great leader" on the horizon, makes many wonder how long things will hold together.
<P>
In the midst of this crisis of legitimacy, Chinese leaders seek to fan the flames of nationalism - and its even more dangerous sibling, anti-foreignism - as a substitute for political consensus.
With a-historicism reigning supreme, the ruling elite seems to have forgotten that from the Boxer Rebellion in 1900 to the burning of the British Mission during the Cultural Revolution, there have been dangerous consequences for exciting mass sentiment by "blaming foreigners" for China's ills.
<P>
While it was true that the outside world once preyed on a defenseless China, modern Chinese must get beyond wounded pride because to insist that China is still being hobbled by foreign conspiracies against its sovereignty and prosperity is to encourage the Chinese to engage in a form of dangerously delusional thinking.
Like its considerable economic successes, China's political failures are firmly rooted at home.
Until its leaders cease seeking revenge for old grievances and face up to the fact that none but themselves is responsible for China's current situation, the day when they will be able to reckon with the formidable new problems their country faces will only be delayed.
<P>
Deng Xiaoping, "the grand architect" of China's economic reforms, encouraged his people "to seek truth from facts."
The facts are that while China's neighbors and America have no great love of the Chinese Communist Party, they seek neither to "contain" nor overthrow it.
Moreover, all Pacific countries have a real desire to normalize their relations with a nation growing at such an astounding rate.
It would be a pity if these concerns continued to be distorted by hard-line Chinese leaders engaging in nationalist rhetoric aimed at convincing their people that Americans and others stand opposed to China's legitimate national aspirations.
<P>
In a moment of uncensored frankness, US House Speaker Newt Gingrich suggested that it was time for the Chinese to "grow up" and cease being so possessed with imagined slights to their sovereignty and so possessive about Taiwan.
(For his part, Li Peng proclaimed that missile launches in the direction of Taiwan "demonstrate the unshakable determination of the People's Liberation Army in defending state sovereignty and territorial integrity.")
Although Gingrich was quickly persuaded by Henry Kissinger to recant his heresy, he had in his own careless way articulated an important notion that few others have dared utter.
<P>
It is time for China "to grow up" and leave its defensive fixation on national sovereignty behind.
Why?
Because it is a perversion and distraction created by the Party for its own purposes (to stay in power) that dangerously distorts China's national interest.
The truth is, that China's real interests are undermined by the firing of missiles off the coast of Taiwan, threatening Hong Kong's elected Legislative Council with dissolution in 1997, thwarting the Dalai Lama by countermanding his selection of the Panchen Lama's reincarnation, selling ballistic missiles to Pakistan and nuclear technology to Iran, saber rattling over the Spratly Islands, or accusing the U.S. of "interfering in China's internal affairs" when it calls attention to trade and human rights abuses.
<P>
China's President Jiang Zemin has recently focused on consolidating his leadership base at home.
If he wishes to consolidate it abroad and prove his acumen as an effective international world leader as well, he will seek to end this charade of nationalist posturing that sees "hostile foreign forces" bent on humiliating and weakening China.
For its part, the outside world must be aware of the historical legacies that often drive China and of the pressures that President Jiang is under from elderly hard-line leaders who came of age at a time when anti-imperialism was a reality rather than a figment of their imagination.
<P>
The real issue for China's leaders is not foreign obstruction but how to govern China's people justly and how to become a constructive and respected member of the world community.
