<HEADLINE>
The Clash Of China's Two Economies
<P>
BEIJING: The problems of China's huge state-owned industries (SOEs) lie half-remembered on the edge of public and political concern.
Given the robust growth of China's private economy over the past decade, this indifference may be somewhat justified.
But how long China's two economies can continue to coexist is becoming a central question for policymakers.
<P>
Reform of SOEs around the world is polarized around two extremes.
In Germany, restructuring of the SOEs of the former East Germany began soon after reunification and proceeded quickly, due to Chancellor Kohl's political will and the vast financial resources lavished on the problem.
China provides the other extreme, postponing SOE reform for as long as possible even though the economy was growing fast, with the market taking root in most parts of Chinese life.
This fact convinces many observers that the political will and financial muscle will never exist to tackle the SOEs.
<P>
Stealthy reform of SOEs, however, is now ongoing.
The central government has given a "green light" to the sale of small SOEs run by local governments (counties and cities), which can be sold to private owners, individual, corporate, or foreign investors, as well as workers in the firms themselves.
Although such restructuring so far often takes the form of mergers and bankruptcy, a great many SOEs have been converted into some kind of share-holding corporations, with the majority of shares held by workers in the firms.
<P>
These changes have been pursued in many localities since 1992.
Many local governments, indeed, began these reforms without the official permission of Beijing administrators.
Indeed, few local leaders reported what they were doing, one reason why few people are aware of how extensive this effort at SOE reform has been.
This is not surprising.
From the start of China's economic reform the saying "do it without saying it" has been the rule.
Today's official recognition of this longstanding practice will only encourage a speedier pace to these reforms.
<P>
Why has Beijing decided to act?
The major achievement of China's 17 years of institutional reform and economic growth has been the growth of a dynamic non-state sector consisting of private firms, self-employed businesses, corporate joint-ventures with foreign capital, and community owned rural enterprises.
This new sector now provides more than 60% of industrial output, 50% of gdp, and contributes 80% to China's soaring growth.
<P>
Against this burgeoning private economy, the SOEs remained in sluggish isolation.
Managerial changes in SOEs began early on in the reform process, with decisionmaking decentralized and inter-firm relations put on a more commercial footing.
Ownership change was ruled off the reform agenda, however, reflecting not only ideological principles but, mainly, the desire to keep SOEs under the state's control.
<P>
Resistance to reform could for a time be justified, so long as: 1 firms in the state sector retained a profitable position in a region's economy; 2. the mobility of state employees remained low; and 3, the non-state sector was not strong enough in both financial terms and entrepreneurial capability to take over the vast state sector.
<P>
Development of the non-state sector and the huge change in the overall structure of China's economy has forced a reassessment of the SOEs.
As SOE profitability, despite their privileged position, continues to decline (it averaged less than 2% in 1995) because of ongoing deterioration in the management of assets and competition from the non-state sector, policymakers and workers in state industries begin to open their minds to the prospect of more change.
They cannot fail to note that the non-state sector provides more jobs (80% of new jobs in the last decade) and higher incomes, as well as an increasing share of government revenues, over 50% in some coastal regions.
<P>
Such numbers mean that effective reform policies are gaining a constituency within the state sector.
Ownership change is becoming more appealing to government officials at various levels.
To leave SOEs through layoffs, reemployment in the private sector, early retirement, or a lump sum payment becomes more palatable to SOE workers who fear that the state can no longer be a reliable provider of privileges and economic well being in a constantly evolving society.
With the growth of private savings, the capital restructuring of SOEs (putting private investors in control) without outright sales of state assets (ie, public redistribution of the capital stock) becomes feasible in both economic and political terms.
<P>
Germany succeeded -- to greater and lesser degrees -- in managing the transformation of the SOEs it inherited because of the wealth of West Germany.
Given the process now underway, perhaps China's reforms are not so very different.
For in China a German-style "wirtschaftswunder" (economic miracle) has been growing up side by side with the state economy.
This new rival economy is now permitting the same sort of restructuring Germany undertook in the early 1990s.
The pace is more gradual, and will take time and incite many conflicts.
But although the language of China's incremental reforms always seems to be cautious, the results on the ground are radical.
The tradition of state owned enterprise is coming to its end.
