<HEADLINE>
Turkey's Unending Political Crisis
<P>
ISTANBUL: After months of tension that almost triggered military intervention, Turkey has reached a crossroads.
The crisis grows from one pivotal question: Must democracy be secular?
<P>
Turkey's military and political old guard claim that the modern system introduced by Kemal Ataturk to replace the Ottoman caliphate almost 75 years ago separates mosque and state.
Article 2 of the Constitute declares Turkey's secular identity; Article 4 says Article 2 can never be changed.
<P>
Yet the largest bloc of voters in the December 1993 democratic elections, which were weighted in favor of traditional political parties, supported Refah, or Welfare, Turkey's largest Islamist party.
Despite weeks of efforts by the same traditional elites to block it, Refah went on to form a coalition government.
The most secular state in the Muslim world suddenly had an Islamist prime minister, Necmettin Erbakan, who espoused some openly Islamist goals.
<P>
These changes left Turkey, a key state bridging East and West, pitting identity against ideology.
The choices: To remain secular, Turkey may have to become undemocratic; to remain democratic, it may have to give up its strictly secular foundation.
This conundrum emerged after the 1995 ejection, spawning political panic.
Refah's coalition partner -- the True Path party of former Prime Minister Tansu Ciller -- was secular.
But Turkey's top generals and an array of parties, left and right, fussed and stewed over the potential for the emergence of an Islamist state if Refah remained in power.
<P>
Each Refah move heightened tensions.
Refah wanted women to be allowed to once again don modest religious dress; for children to be able to go to religious parochial schools through middle school.
It talked about moving the day of rest from Sunday to Friday, the Muslim sabbath, in an overwhelmingly Muslim country.
But soon the secular press began writing about creeping Islamization, and the military started issuing public and private warnings.
In meetings with judges, academics, journalists and civil leaders, the top brass pointed out that Turkish law calls on the army to protect the "secular state."
In early June, the generals proclaimed that they were prepared to intervene--as they had in 1960, 1971 and l980 -- if they deemed it necessary.
They also began purging military ranks of anyone with Islamist sympathies.
<P>
The immediate crisis passed when Erbakan succumbed to pressure and resigned June 18, a move he hoped would allow his coalition partner to take over.
The brokered deal had Ciller, who was deputy prime minister and foreign minister, switching places with Erbakan.
Instead, President Suleyman Demirel turned to the conservative Motherland party and Mesut Yilmaz to form a new government.
(In the 1995 elections, Motherland won the second highest number of seats in parliament and True Path came in third.)
So Turkey’s political system came, once more, under the control of a secular party.
But the central issue--whether or not there is a place for a religious party in a democracy--is unlikely to go away, for several reasons.
<P>
Refah remains the largest party; its 22% of the vote in 1995 parliamentary elections translated into almost a third of the parliament’s 550 seats.
Despite the loss of the premiership, it is still a powerful political force.
New elections, which look unavoidable in the next year, are unlikely to change that fact -- unless the party is banned.
Indeed, Refah could well do even better in the next election.
<P>
Excluding Refah -- either by ousting or outlawing it -- could backfire.
In May, the state prosecutor filed a suit in Turkey's constitutional court to have Refah, which is not a new party by any means, banned on the grounds that it is a religious party in a secular state.
The court could agree.
There is also talk about legislative moves designed in part to isolate or marginalize Refah.
One proposal is a shift from a parliamentary system to a presidential system; another seeks to cut back the number of major parties from seven to two or three--aimed partly at consolidating voters in secular parties that would outnumber Refah,.
<P>
Such actions would effectively disenfranchise 21% of voters.
Refah's followers would probably try to form another party with a similar mandate but without the formal symbols or language of an Islamist movement.
A more ominous possibility is that some, even many, of its followers could be forced underground and into extralegal activities.
A movement now prepared to work within the system would be radicalized -- with all the dangers such a move entails.
<P>
Refah is likely to remain a major political force as long as the traditional parties do not clean up their acts.
While many voters selected Refah because of its platform, others turned to a religious party as a means of rejecting the traditional parties and their exclusionary tactics.
Why?
A tiny core of politicians have dominated Turkish politics for a generation or two, miring politics in divisive rivalries, power games and corruption.
Ciller is widely believed to have forged an alliance with Refah, which she once condemned as more dangerous to Turkey than the rebellious Kurds to protect herself from the very charges of corruption that Turkey's new government now seems poised to bring against her.
Senior politicians are immune from criminal prosecution under Turkish law.
So trying to squelch the party -- in court, at the hands of the military, or through legislation -- may only flaw Turkey's political system further.
<P>
The growing role of the military sparks added concern.
Between February and June this year, the generals demanded that private Koranic instruction be brought under government control, that all Islamist social activities be restricted, that public and school dress codes be fully secular, and that the number of pupils in religious schools be limited.
<P>
In light of regional trends, the military may be right to worry.
Refah criticized previous governments for being lackeys of the Americans.
It talked of a foreign policy that looked more toward Turkey's cultural and religious brethren than to the West.
It put forth dotty ideas about an Islamic common market, Islamic NATO, and an Islamic currency.
<P>
Once in power, Erbakan tempered his tone and actions.
Turkey continued to allow the U.S.-led "Operation Provide Comfort" against Iraq to use Turkish bases.
It remained a vital member of NATO.
Relations with Israel actually improved with more visits by ranking Turkish officials than ever before -- a move orchestrated by Ciller but accepted by Refah.
<P>
Power actually led Refah to compromise, not to extremes.
Over the next year, Turkish politicians would do well to remember that record and the broader context of the party's appeal as the fate of Refah and key questions about Turkey's political system are determined.
