<HEADLINE>
Ukraine's Missing Will
<P>
KIEV: Today Russia and Ukraine are on parallel courses of economic reform.
Both achieved financial stabilization during 1996, but each country is still experiencing considerable declines in economic output.
<P>
Russia and Ukraine make a good pair for the purpose of comparison, as their preconditions were quite similar.
They are both large countries with predominantly Slavic populations, arising out of the Soviet Union.
Originally, Ukraine had a slightly higher output per capita at the beginning of the transition; Russia has more natural resources.
The big difference between the two is that Russia launched its economic reforms in 1992, while Ukraine did so almost three years later.
<P>
Reform started later in Ukraine for several reasons.
A fundamental cause was political leadership.
Independent Ukraine's first president, Leonid Kravchuk, cared little for economic reform, while Russian President Boris Yeltsin believed in, and pushed for, radical economic reform, even if he soon were to hesitate.
Russia at the outset of the reform process possessed a strong group of economic reformers; too few in Ukraine understood the need for radical economic reform.
Instead, many Ukrainians saw Russia's exploitation of Ukraine as the main problem facing their country.
Russians had little but communism to blame for their plight.
<P>
Ukraine turned around in 1994, with the election of President Leonid Kuchma.
He concluded that Ukraine had learned that slow reforms did not work and that radical reform was the only way out of his country's mounting economic mess.
<P>
One consequence of the delayed reform in Ukraine was a vicious hyperinflation of as much as 10,000 percent in 1993, when Russia's inflation was "only " 840 percent.
Until the end of 1994, Ukraine had a maximum personal income tax of 90 percent, to compare with 35 percent in Russia, and Ukraine had almost comprehensive foreign trade regulations and far-reaching price controls, while Russia had liberalized both regimes in 1992 and 1993.
Privatization began much later in Ukraine.
The private sector accounts for about 55 percent of Ukrainian GDP to compare with 70 percent in Russia.
<P>
All this had strong effects on the real economy.
Today, we can compare with Russia to assess what the costs of delaying reform in Ukraine have been.
Official production statistics are unreliable, but the drop in output has been far greater in Ukraine than in Russia, and it continues in 1996.
GDP per capita at current exchange rates is almost three times higher in Russia than in Ukraine.
The official average wage in dollars is about twice as high in Russia as in Ukraine, and it is evident to the naked eye that Ukraine now is a poorer society than Russia, while the opposite used to be true.
The impoverishment of Ukraine is closely connected with its prolonged period of hyper-inflation.
<P>
It is also manifest that a much larger share of the Ukrainian economy has disappeared into the underground.
The underground economy is commonly assessed at one third of the actual Russian GDP but takes up about half of the actual Ukrainian GDP.
The much higher income and payroll taxes that existed in Ukraine before Kuchma launched his reforms this year forced a larger share of the Ukrainian economy underground.
Much of this "black business" has barely started turning legal as yet.
<P>
Some theoreticians argued that slower reforms would facilitate legal and institutional developments.
However, virtually every aspect of the transition has been done later in Ukraine than in Russia.
For instance, Ukraine is till waiting for a civil code and company law.
Slow reforms have hampered the emergence of new enterprises.
While Russia has registered 900,000 new private enterprises, Ukraine has a mere 91,000, though its population is one third of Russia's.
<P>
The fundamental problem is that much less has happened at the Ukrainian enterprises.
No restructuring appears to have occurred until 1995, and many enterprises have become terribly run down.
Bankruptcies remain rare.
To a far greater extent than in Russia, old inept managers remain in place, and they have not started rethinking their ways.
The Ukrainian financial system is still rudimentary.
<P>
But are there no advantages in being late?
Learning from pioneers is undoubtedly useful, and Ukraine has utilized many lessons.
Notably, the liberalization of the agricultural and energy sectors was much more comprehensive in Ukraine than in Russia.
However, these positive transfers are countered by negative transfers from the inertia of corruption and rent-seeking.
For instance, all kinds of arrears remain higher in Ukraine.
<P>
The one significant positive factor of delayed reform appears political.
To a far greater extent than in Russia, Ukrainians understand that they are victims of the absence of reform and not of "shock therapy."
Ukrainians know what to blame, while more Russians are confused as reflected in the high vote for Russian communists in last July's presidential elections.
<P>
When comparing Russia and Ukraine, we should play down frequent national characterizations and instead emphasize the key feature: Russia is ahead of Ukraine economically, because it at least attempted radical economic reform in 1992.
Conversely, Ukraine is ahead of Belarus, which has still not undertaken serious liberalization or privatization.
These intrinsically very similar Slavic nations show that the effects of a delay in reforms are dramatic, and they are bound to last for over a decade.
<P>
The unequivocal lesson is that the costs of any delay or inconsistency in economic reforms are horrendous.
The worse off the country initially is, the greater the costs of less than perfect reforms unfortunately seem.
