<HEADLINE>
Weak Growth in the West - A Threat to Eastern Europe's Strong Growth
<P>
FRANKFURT: Current economic trends in Western and Eastern Europe are back to a familiar pattern of the past fifteen years: divergence.
In the West, the picture is of economic pessimism and downward forecasts.
Even if hopes for a recovery later this year materialize, GDP growth in EU countries will be down a third on last year.
In the East, a growing number of economies -- exceptions come in the CIS, though Russia is starting to grow -- are expanding fast.
Countries that tackled reforms in earnest should grow 5% or more for the next few years at least.
<P>
Should we believe such projections of opposing developments in the West and East?
After all, the factors which once explained why economies often developed out of step no longer exist.
The countries of Eastern Europe no longer function in isolation from the world market.
Both the transition from a planned economy to a market economy and re-orientation towards the West are in advanced stages.
Association agreements with the EU have improved Eastern countries' market access.
This helped vastly increase their exports to the EU as a proportion of total exports.
The figure is currently around 50%, and growing.
So slower growth in demand in what has become by far the most important export market has significant potential to disrupt the progress of Eastern European economies.
<P>
Nonetheless, the basis for an upturn has broadened in many of these countries.
Exports, traditional catalysts for recovery, have driven the restructuring process so far that both investment and private consumption now contribute increasingly to economic growth in a number of countries.
More important: progress with reform has seen production bases expanded and diversified to an extent that allows a greater division of labor between Eastern and Western Europe.
<P>
This is where the challenge facing the economies of Western Europe to strengthen their international competitive position comes in.
One reason for their weak growth costs.
It has been caused by wages that are too high, too inflexible, insufficiently differentiated, and overburdened by social security costs and high taxes.
The rise of the Deutsche Mark and the currencies in neighboring countries during the foreign exchange market upheavals of recent years made this problem even more painful.
In order to survive, many companies are forced to exploit the advantages of low wage costs found in Germany's Eastern European neighbors.
Even taking into account differences in productivity, these costs are generally between a quarter and a third of the level in Eastern Europe.
<P>
Both the volume of goods sent abroad for contract processing and the sharp increase -- albeit from a low level -- in foreign direct investment in Eastern European countries show that more and more companies are taking this way out of the cost crisis.
German direct investment abroad more than doubled in 1995, and the inflow into the Czech Republic trebled.
The increasing integration of the Eastern periphery into a pan-European production process is part of a structural change that should boost trade by more than enough to compensate the dampening effects of falling growth in Western Europe.
<P>
But new divisions of labor create problems of acceptance, which in the West are exacerbated by weak economic growth.
Central to this is the worry that shifting production abroad will lead to more job losses in Western Europe, above all in labor-intensive sectors.
It is becoming unpopular to express support for intensifying eastward economic links, as this could strengthen potential competitors.
<P>
The counter-argument is that increased competition is a global phenomenon.
Pressure on companies to cut costs would not abate if West-East integration is delayed.
Secondly, frictional losses in the short term often obscure the fact that, in the long term, inputs from cheap suppliers may help secure jobs in the West, and that greater specialization increases exports as well as imports and offers gains in wealth for both trading partners.
And it would be short-sighted to hinder the catching-up process in Eastern Europe, given the consensus that extending the EU eastwards is a desirable aim.
Reducing the income gap between old and new members would cut the transfer payments to be made by the Western countries to the East following the latter's eventual accession to the EU.
<P>
For the countries of Eastern Europe, the growing influx of capital and know-how is a major force in strengthening their growth potential.
The development so far underscores the close link between the attractiveness of a country to foreign investors and the pace of market reforms, deregulation, a convincing privatization programme and stability-oriented monetary and fiscal policy.
For the latecomers to the transformation process this is where action is needed.
<P>
For front-runners in transition new challenges have emerged.
A rising tide of capital inflows -- not only direct, but also portfolio investment -- increases their foreign liabilities.
It is also bound to push their exchange rates up.
Some Eastern European countries are now suffering from the very problem Germany has had to cope with for so long: Successful economic policies are often acknowledged by rising exchange rates.
This is a mixed blessing, and another indication of similarities growing between Eastern and Western Europe.
