<HEADLINE>
What Price Europe?
<P>
WARSAW: Russia’s crisis has mesmerized and monopolized European affairs recently.
Too much so, as other issues facing Eastern Europe, particularly the inertia in securing Nato expansion, are being permitted to drift.
That neglect may be dangerous, considering the stroppy nationalism espoused by Russia’s new premier, Yevgeny Primakov.
<P>
Soon, Poland will become a member of Nato.
Talks to join the European Union are getting started.
Two other postcommunist countries -- Hungary and the Czech Republic -- are in like positions.
<P>
Displays of doubt, fear, and ambivalence about Europe are, perhaps, not very strange.
Afer all, "Euroscepticism" is a watchword in established EU members like Denmark and Britain.
But the ways in which these doubts are voiced here in the east are often astonishing and unexpected, and tell us a lot about our politics.
<P>
Resentments seem particularly strange when measured against public opinion as a whole.
In Poland, 92% of the population "wait for it " and 85% of Roman Catholic priests support the country’s "return" to Europe.
At the same time different political and social groups strongly, sometimes virulently, oppose EU membership, and seek to impose conditions on joining the Union that are likely to scuttle membership talks.
These conditions are put forward in the full knowledge that they are intolerable to our European "partners."
<P>
What types of "anti-europeanism" are flourishing in Poland and other postcommunist countries?
First, round up the usual suspects.
Fears that EU membership will mean that Poland’s national identity -- so long submerged, so recently regained at so high a price -- will be re-submerged, are rampant.
<P>
These misgivings are both real and unreal.
Sovereignty within the EU is, to be sure, weaker than going-it-alone outside the Union.
But nowadays sovereignty has meanings very different than in other times.
Most Western countries recognize that the core aspects of sovereignty - the ability of a society to maintain the liberty and prosperity of its citizens - are best secured within alliances and groupings like Nato and the EU, not by going-it-alone.
<P>
The second standard objection to the EU is grown down on the farm.
Polish peasants despise the Union for the same reasons French peasants fear it: that the EU will force farmers to change their ways.
(There is, undoubtedly, a bit of rank hypocrisy in this as, over the years, no group has picked the Union’s pockets more than French peasants).
Poles remain proud that they maintained private ownership in agriculture throughout the communist era, but know that these farmers (30% of society, three times the size of rural populations in most EU countries) constitute a huge social burden as well as a potent force to blockade modernization, whether inspired by the EU or not.
<P>
A nastier harvest comes from those that identify the EU with destructive values and ideologies -- sexual permissiveness, pornography, cultural Americanization, liberalism in all its forms.
In their blunt moral equation the EU equals the West, and the West equals disease, pure and simple.
<P>
Their one idea?
Defend "family values", whatever that means.
Recently, a group of parliament members (quite a large one - 30 deputies`) left the majority post-solidarity party and created a new "Polish Family" party with the slogan that the ruling coalition is in "the service of Brussels."
<P>
A less agressive anti-europeanism comes from a tendency that struggles for old values like honor and virtue.
In practice this movement is also motivated by little more than a fear of change.
But here people who were active in the former "Solidarity" movement - for them a movement of community and not of individuals, a movement for public and not private freedom - form a new bloc of euro-antagonists.
Membership in the EU means the final destruction of their romantic dreams of Poland.
This tendency would not be dangerous if its followers belonged only to the elder generation.
Surprisingly, many young people (students even) hanker to restore some kind of "feudal" communitarian order.
<P>
The newest form of euroscepticism is provoked by European regulations and recent statements in the German Bundestag.
Polish-German relations have been good since 1989, and Germany strongly supported Polish membership in Nato and the EU.
Recently, however, a few Germans expelled from Poland in 1945 and 1946 (and/or their children) began to speak about their rights to reclaim the property they lost when they were forced to flee in the chaos at the end of Hitler’s War.
Such property claims by ethnic Germans worry the Czech Republic too, because its pre-war Sudeten German population was forcibly expelled in the immediate postwar years.
<P>
These ghostly claims provoked a broad, xenophobic reaction that mushroomed to include all the EU.
Suddenly, we now read about the dangers of Greeks or Portuguese coming to Poland and stealing jobs from poor Poles or about rich French or Austrians buying Polish property on the cheap.
All this is nonsense, of course, as the potential scale of such events is minuscule.
For the lower strata of Polish society, however, these raw political arguments resonate.
<P>
So, Poles as a whole may indeed be for the European Union.
But scratch those yes votes and you’ll find that 50-60% of the people have serious worries about membership.
It remains unfashionable (so far) to openly denounce the EU, but fashions change.
Doubts are growing and those weaker politicians who slavishly follow the public’s mood may begin to shout and act accordingly.
<P>
If they do, the ruling center/right coalition, which has serious problems in Parliament, may fracture over Europe, as Britain’s Tories did.
Such a turn will leave the postcommunists as the only "good" Europeans in Poland.
The price here may be high, for European leaders and Brussels bureaucrats - many never really happy about the process of eastward enlargement -- will get a ready-made excuse to toughen the terms of membership and thus stall Polish accession.
Europe: here, and yet so far away.
