<HEADLINE>
Will Russia Grow?
<P>
CAMBRIDGE: Now that President Yeltsin is reelected, will Russia grow?
With a democratic government, highly educated workforce, vast natural resources, and increasing political stability (though the sacking of General Lebed gives one pause here), it should.
Moreover, Russia has completed the three crucial steps of economic liberalization: it freed prices, privatized most of the economy, and finally conquered inflation.
A closer look, however, reveals grounds for concern.
<P>
Growth comes from either the formation of new businesses or the restructuring of privatized firms.
In most transition countries, new business has been the engine of growth.
The spectacular recent growth of China and Poland came largely from new firms.
Growth in privatized or state firms is much harder to achieve, though restructuring is critical to the transition.
Until now, corruption, predatory taxation, and distortionary interest rate policies have stood in the way of Russian growth.
For it to come, Yeltsin must act in all three areas.
<P>
Russia lags behind other fast reformers in small business formation.
According to the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), at the end of 1995 Poland had some 2 million small private businesses, compared to only 1 million for Russia, with a population four times larger.
Even if we allow, as the EBRD does, that Russia has another 2 million unregistered private businesses, it is still far behind Poland.
Why?
<P>
Surveys of shop managers in Moscow and Warsaw show that the reason lies in the anti-business, predatory policies of local governments in Russia, compared to a more favorable stance of local authorities in Poland.
Corruption, bureaucratic delay, excessive regulation, and even a failure of basic police protection are a bigger problem in Moscow.
It takes 3 months to register a business in Moscow, compared to less than 1 month in Warsaw.
An average Moscow shopkeeper is visited by 19 inspectors (who issue fines 83% of the time) each year.
Warsaw shopkeepers are visited on average by only 8 inspectors annually, and are fined only 46% of the time.
Moscow shopkeepers say they "sometimes" need to bribe officials to do business; Warsaw shopkeepers need to bribe "rarely."
Most dramatically, 76% of Moscow shopkeepers report that one needs a "roof" -- the term for protection by a racket or powerful figure -- in order to operate.
The comparable number in Warsaw is 6%.
Warsaw, of course, does not have a perfect government, but certainly one more successful at discharging its functions than Moscow's government.
<P>
The causes of this failure are blunt.
Tax policies nationally remain inconsistent and predatory, driving business underground and stimulating corruption and organized crime.
At the local level, most communist officials of the past remain in power.
Scared of its potential power, they despise private business.
Russia never had a Solidarity movement to sweep these hacks from office.
<P>
Lack of local elections contributes to this malaise.
In 1991 and 1993 Yeltsin passed decrees giving him power to appoint most regional leaders.
Yeltsin appointees for the most part have not cared much about growth, or running for reelection: they have spent their time lobbying the president for credits.
This lack of accountability to voters and local businesses is the critical difference between Russia and Poland, where local elections have been the centerpiece of a new society.
<P>
This year, Russia is holding numerous local elections, presenting opportunities for new private businesses to voice their concerns as local politicians scramble for campaign contributions.
As importantly, Russian regions are moving toward paying for local spending with local taxes.
This should make them more interested in promoting business as a source of tax revenue.
The year 1997 will show if local government will be hospitable toward business.
If so, growth will come.
<P>
Privatization must also kick in.
In 1994-94 Russia privatized 15,000 large and medium sized firms.
These are restructuring much faster than remaining state firms, but still far too slowly.
The problem -- as with local government -- is obsolete human capital: most privatized firms have kept communist managers who don't know how to operate in the market.
Replacing them is difficult, and a task in which Russia lags.
<P>
In transition economies, large outside investors are agents of corporate change: bringing new management, knowhow, and capital to privatized firms.
Russia is no exception.
But privatized Russian firms are primarily owned by insiders.
Large investors -- banks, commercial firms, investment funds -- have been slow to come.
The good news is that, despite insider domination, over 70% of Russian firms now have at least one outside blockholder, owning a 15% stake on average.
The bad news is that most of these blockholders are passive.
<P>
Government economic policy distracts Russia's financial institutions from focusing on privatized firms.
The financial sector put its resources into bonds, which in 1996 yield up to 200% in real terms.
So why bother buying stocks or investing in restructuring?
<P>
This too may change.
With stabilization, bond yields are falling and the government is increasing foreign access to the market.
No surprise that the stockmarket has rebounded, pumped by foreign investment.
Russian investors, including the banks, are beginning to look at investing in companies as a source of profit.
As these become involved, management turnover and restructuring is likely to speed up, and privatized firms may begin to grow.
<P>
It is high time for Russia's government to get down to business.
Economic policy has made enormous progress in the last three years, but a new thrust is needed.
At a minimum, this thrust must include tax reform, opening financial markets, and most importantly public sector reform -- spearheaded by local elections.
If these reforms occur, growth will come in 1997.
And Yeltsin must succeed in this: his countrymen are tired of waiting.
