<HEADLINE>
Will America's Good Times Keep Rolling On?
<P>
CAMBRIDGE: The U.S. economy is now in its eighth year of robust economic growth.
The American unemployment rate is below 5% and is, thusly, at its lowest level in 25 years.
Inflation, that scourge of not many years ago, seems to have virtually disappeared from the economic horizon.
<P>
Faced with these remarkable numbers, most Europeans, in particular the French, have responded almost viscerally by looking for flaws in America's performance: surely these numbers must conceal some dark blemish; surely they must contain some artificial economic growth.
There must be some other way to prosperity besides the rough-and-tumble American way, many in Europe seem to say.
The facts, however, suggest that, up close, American economic indicators are even more impressive than they appear from afar.
<P>
On the demand side, it is not public sector demand but private sector demand that has been the engine driving growth relentlessly ahead in the United States.
Within the private sector, the biggest fuel for growth has not been consumer demand, but comes instead from investment demand and, despite the dollar's appreciation of recent times and the Asian crisis, a boom in US exports.
Both US investment and US exports increased by about 10% last year alone.
The American economy faces neither a problem of capital shortage, nor a lack of competitiveness.
<P>
The U.S. budget deficit has been eliminated, at least for now.
This has occurred, moreover, almost completely without fog and mirrors.
There has been no resort to the type of budgetary gimmicks that many European countries used to meet the deficit targets mandated for participation in monetary union by the Maastricht agreement.
<P>
This taming of America's budgetary headaches came, indeed, without much effort: the country's improvement in its public finances has been a quasi- mechanical consequence of economic growth and a robust increase in federal government tax revenues.
Of course, in America there are, as elsewhere, problems on the horizon, problems associated with demographic developments and the aging of the population.
But these problems will not begin to materialize until at least 20 years from now, and are far from dramatic.
<P>
The idea that America's vibrant economic performance has been achieved at the detriment of the country's poorest is old hat in France and much of Europe.
To be sure, income inequality in the United States has increased tremendously over the last 20 years.
Even in this area, however, the recent news is good.
Since the mid 1990s, income distribution in America -- the gap between rich and poor -- has stabilized, if not narrowed slightly.
Why did this switch occur and is it permanent?
The truth is, no one really knows.
But at least we now know that economic growth in the United States is not necessarily synonymous with an increase in income inequality.
<P>
What is the secret of the American economic performance?
Overall, the ideologues of the market economy are probably right.
Competition has forced firms to transform; government allowed them free reign to do so; and they have done it.
Macroeconomic policy has not induced economic growth; but - and this is very important - it has not hindered it, either: The smooth combination between a reduction of budget deficits and a more expansionary monetary policy will go on record as one of the masterpieces of the genre.
<P>
Can we talk about a miracle?
Some are talking about the "new economy", in which the traditional constraints of production and the risks of inflation have been left behind.
Others speak about the disappearance of business cycles.
They are wrong.
And it is precisely this "irrational exuberance" (to borrow an expression used by Chairman Alan Greenspan of the Federal Reserve Board, when he reported to the American Congress last year) that in time could bring this phase of American economic expansion to an end.
<P>
Investors have become accustomed to seeing rates of return in the neighborhood of 20% each and every year.
Based on the economic performance of the last years, many investors (and some in the public too) believe that economic growth will go on forever.
But this buoyant optimism has allowed the American stockmarket to become clearly overvalued, according to even conservative estimates this overvaluation now tips 20% or more.
The dividend-price ratio is now under 2%, an historic low level.
Evidence from the past, however, suggests that such a dividend-price ratio will be followed by a decrease of 40% on average over the next ten years.
<P>
So the question facing Americans as they toast their good times is this: If and when a correction occurs, will it take the shape of a stock market crash, as occurred in 1987, or will it take the shape of a slow and painful descent, as in Japan in the 1990s?
I simply do not know.
But I think that in today's American euphoria are the roots of the next American recession, and maybe the next world recession, too.
