<HEADLINE>
Will European Union Be Killed By Europe’s Malaise?
<P>
PARIS: Save for the Netherlands, Europe's economies are languishing: according to the OECD, average growth in Western Europe will not exceed 1.6% this year, a drop from the 2.7% growth last year.
Unemployment is also at record and near record highs almost everywhere.
At the same time United States is growing at 2.2%, Japan at 2.6%, ... and China at 10.5.
<P>
The economic slowdown comes at the worst possible moment, as Europe readies itself for monetary union (emu), and the tough budget constraints imposed as a precondition for joining limit the governments' ability to use old fashioned stimulants to get their ailing economies moving.
Quite to the contrary, the governments are told they must slash their social spending at the very time when their populations are getting restless.
As a consequence, to the extent that European union is thought of in predominantly liberal economic terms, support for new European institutions may be in jeopardy.
<P>
The effect of past policies is also wearing off.
The exit by the British pound and Italian lira in September 1992 from the European Monetary System gave those two countries spurts of growth.
But those surges are subsiding and can't be repeated: Italy, reconciling itself to a modest 1.7% rate of growth, is putting forth the idea of revising the Maastricht criteria for achieving monetary union in 1999.
In the UK, major trade union strikes have returned to the scene for the first time since early in the Thatcher era.
<P>
Even more ominously, the most stalwart supporters of further economic integration, Germany and France, are also exhibiting the most strains from today's economic asphyxiation.
German GDP will grow a mere 0.5% in 1996, barely a fifth of Chancellor Kohl's modest projections last year.
With 1% instead of the 2.2% growth forecast last spring, France is not much better.
Unemployment is also very high in both countries: 12.5% on this side of the Rhine, 10.2% on the other.
All the while, Bill Clinton can boast of the creation of ten million new jobs since his arrival at the White House in 1993.
<P>
A part of Germany’s difficulty is due to the cost of unification with East Germany, which absorbs about 5% of GDP annually and contributes to one of the highest percentages of public expenditure in the world.
The "employment pact" concluded at the beginning of the year between the government and employee and employer organizations, indeed, was scuttled when Chancellor Kohl unilaterally decreed reductions in social spending on the order of DM50 billion so as to meet a looming budget crunch and prepare the ground for meeting the conditions for emu membership.
<P>
The OECD thinks these cuts are still insufficient, but Germany's usually polite unions now speak of "acts of force" and 350,000 people demonstrated last June in Bonn to protest the import of "capitalism American style" and demand the Chancellor’s resignation.
To be sure, Germany is not fraying at the seams: social consensus remains a German secular faith and the Social Democrats have not found a plausible man to challenge Helmut Kohl.
But cutting back on the country's vaunted social protection system seems to strike at the roots of German postwar democracy.
What sort of Europe, many Germans ask, demands such a sacrifice?
<P>
The French state does not have unification to finance, so you might think its plight easier.
But French citizens have an ingrained habit of demanding that government solve every problem, no matter how trivial and this is costly too.
Hence the extreme unpopularity of all measures designed to reduce the public deficit and debt, with strikes breaking out all over the map.
Dissatisfaction is made worse by the government's mistakes: on the strength of widely expected economic recovery, it predicted in June 1995 the creation of 700,000 jobs over the next two years.
Today, fear of unemployment limits consumption, lowering still further the state’s fiscal revenues.
And with the prospect of general elections in 1998, the political front is infinitely less quiet than in Germany.
Not only are the forces of opposition — socialists, communists, and the extreme right — attacking the government on all fronts, but the ruling Gaullist majority is beginning to crack.
<P>
Economic and political fluctuations are not unusual.
What makes this slump different is that the French blame European union, and increasing economic globalization in general, for their troubles which they expect to be more lasting than in the past.
The danger, then, is that European unity may be seriously set back in the eyes of the confused public.
<P>
To appease the mood of dissatisfaction, Prime Minister Alain Juppé recently announced a reduction of income taxes scheduled for 1997.
But 70% of the French, when asked about this measure, do not believe it will work.
Despite his past readiness to stray from the path of orthodoxy, President Chirac gives only an ambiguous blessing to his Prime Minister, losing no opportunity to express his agreement with the strict policies of Helmut Kohl.
No doubt he remembers a past fiasco of his own making when, in 1974 as prime minister under Giscard d’Estaing, he attempted to incite economic recovery through inflation.
<P>
President Chirac's predicament is a Continental phenomenon.
Governments that push monetary union do so without being quite sure of what type of Europe they want to build.
Unless and until Europe's leaders shed their confusions, and speak plainly to their citizens about their thinking and their purposes, Europe's economic malaise will likely lead to a dangerous brew of monetary muddle and social unrest.
<P>
At the same time, Washington doesn't even want to hear any talk about conferring on a European, as France demands, command of the allied fleet in the Mediterranean.
Who, indeed, can imagine America's Senate agreeing that a foreigner might hold in his hands the fate of the prestigious 6th Fleet, the most powerful naval armada in the world?
Also simultaneously, the United States has made it clear that no one will be able, in Africa or elsewhere, to follow a policy that excludes the United States.
Yet America demands that it should be left alone to put back on track the delicate Israeli-Palestinian peace process, in jeopardy since the assassination of Yitzak Rabin and the Israeli right's return to power in Jerusalem.
<P>
Here is a budding feud that was exaggerated by the media.
General de Gaulle is no longer here, and no real rupture between Paris and Washington is on the horizon, even if on some issues -- Rwanda and Zaire, for example -- the views of the two governments are at opposite poles.
But recent tiffs point to fundamental differences with respect to how both countries view NATO.
General de Gaulle and his successors have never given up the idea of conducting a foreign policy independent of America.
They have always viewed European unity as a means to such a policy, to the extent that, union being strength, it can serve to reduce the disequilibrium of power between the United States and its allies across the Atlantic.
<P>
For four decades, the existence of the Soviet Union, from which France was protected by the German buffer zone, gave French presidents a certain freedom of action vis ŕ vis the United States, all the while it being clear that whenever a major crisis occurred -- in Berlin, Cuba, or the Gulf War -- no one was as strong in their support of the Americans as the French.
Perhaps one day Russia will become a threat again, but for the moment it is more threatened by its own internal disintegration.
Perhaps China will one day be tempted to renew its dream of an empire which, throughout the ages, has never ceased to haunt the great powers.
But the fact remains that, for the moment, America is the only superpower, thus limiting France's freedom to act in the world independently.
<P>
The isolationism that characterized America's 1994 congressional elections is forgotten.
American power, its foreign trade, rises in the price of oil, and the industrialization of China and Latin America, make it impossible for America to lose interest in the rest of the planet.
Indeed, the Congress makes no bones about legislating against countries guilty of trading with Iran, Iraq, or Cuba.
Bill Clinton, elected in 1992 against George Bush (whom Clinton accused of being solely interested in foreign policy) is tending more and more to become personally involved in foreign affairs, a habit of all second term US presidents, with one eye cast on the history books.
<P>
In this Clinton is encouraged by a Europe shown incapable of solving by itself the Bosnian tragedy.
But this cheerleading is not the case where Europe's economic interests are at stake: it is enough to look at the EU's refusal to join the embargo against Cuba, the strength of Germany's reaction to the merger of America's two airplane manufacturers Boeing and McDonnell-Douglas, or the determination with which the EU fifteen are pushing forward with monetary union.
The importance of unemployment on the old continent, as against an America which created six million new jobs in the last four years, is sufficient to explain this independent attitude.
<P>
What remains to be seen is what will be the value of the EU's new currency, the euro, against the dollar.
Will the single currency turn out to be an instrument of independence or of renewed alignment?
Will America view the euro's establishment as an aid or a threat to the dollar?
These questions are certainly much more important than those that contributed to the outbreak of the idea of renewed Franco-American crisis.
The answers to them will go a long way toward determining not only long-term relations between Washington and Paris, but between America and all of Europe.
