<HEADLINE>
Zionism's Balance Sheet
<P>
JERUSALEM: Exactly one hundred years ago, the Zionist movement was founded.
A few hundred Jewish intellectuals -- writers, doctors, lawyers, even a few women -- mainly from Eastern Europe, came together in Basil, Switzerland.
This was the first Zionist Congress, chaired by a then only moderately-known Viennese journalist and playwright Theodor Herzl.
<P>
The delegation had no power.
No one had elected them.
Europe’s Jewish elite -- rabbis, local community leaders, bankers such as the Rothschilds -- were skeptical when they were not outright hostile in their attitude toward the congress.
What Herzl and his followers were aiming for was something truly revolutionary: the establishment of a Jewish commonwealth in Palestine, then part of the Ottoman Empire.
<P>
The meeting was held at a perilous moment for European Jewry.
Competing nationalist movements were on the rise in a disintegrating Austro-Hungarian Empire.
Anti-Semitic theories and parties were emerging in Germany, Austria, and Hungary.
Social unrest in Tsarist Russia was bringng a growing pauperization to the large communities of Russia’s Jewish Pale.
Alongside this increased poverty came many violent pogroms.
In the face of this turmoil, Herzl and his supporters argued that neither religious tolerance nor social justice could serve as a lasting solution for the “Jewish problem.”
Only national self-determination would do.
Let the Jews have a homeland, they argued in language derived from the Italian risorgimento, from Polish nationalism, from romantic literature.
Europe needs it; the Jews need it.
<P>
Few followed Herzl’s call.
Most Jews continued to believe in the vision of their integration into a bourgeois, liberal Europe.
Others, especially in Eastern Europe, continued to pray for a messianic deliverance from their troubles in God’s own time.
Still others joined revolutionary movements.
Few shared Herzl’s angst that European culture, symbolized by the legendary longevity of Queen Victoria and Emperor Franz Josef, would violently collapse.
Less than ten years after Herzl’s death, however, it did collapse in the carnage, nationalisms, revolutions and counterrevolutions of the Great War and its aftermath.
Herzl’s pessimism, nurtured by his having witnessed Vienna’s disintegrating fin de siecle order, turned out to be tragically prescient.
<P>
Where does Zionism stand today?
Zionism was too weak, and the enemies of the Jews too strong, for the murder of six million Jews in the Holocaust to be avoided.
But the Jewish state that emerged, phoenix-like, from the ashes of the greatest tragedy in modern Jewish history, is an impressive success story.
Home to almost five million Jews, Israel became a haven for more than one million Jews fleeing Arab lands.
Recently it became home for 600,000 Jews from the former Soviet Union as well as 50,000 black Ethiopian Jews in flight from civil war and famine.
<P>
Israel is a modern, technologically developed society, which has managed to preserve its democratic institutions under conditions of almost constant war and siege.
It boasts a thriving economy and universities and research institutes on par with the best in the world.
Israel is proud of its strong and highly motivated army.
<P>
Yet Israel has not achieved its main goal; not yet.
Israel’s victories on the battlefield guaranteed its survival and independence, but they did not win the battle for peace.
Arab opposition to the very existence of a Jewish state in what the Arabs call “the Arab region” has been more sustained than Herzl or anyone of his generation -- nurtured on European ideas of humanism -- would have ever believed.
In his naivete, Herzl even thought that the Arab world would be grateful to the Jews for bringing modern technology to the region.
Without doubt, in their wars of survival, the Israelis have too often neglected to treat the Palestinians with the same dignity that they expected the world to accord to them.
<P>
Ultimately, Israel will be judged by its ability to live in peace with its neighbors.
Such a peace entails mutual tolerance and acceptance, and an historical compromise with the Palestinian Arabs.
The Labor-led government of Yitzhak Rabin and Shimon Peres made a dramatic breakthrough towards that very goal in 1993, with the Oslo agreements for mutual recognition between Israel and the PLO.
But Rabin was assassinated by a fanatic Jewish nationalist because of his willingness to make this compromise.
Only a few months after Rabin’s murder his Labor Party, badly crippled by the assassination, lost the 1996 elections.
<P>
The present right-wing government led by Benjamin Netanyahu has managed in a little more than one year to freeze most of the achievements of the bold politics of Rabin and Peres.
The window of an historic opportunity is being closed.
<P>
This year Israel is celebrating both the 100th anniversary of the founding of Zionism and its 50th anniversary as an independent nation.
For a persecuted, state-less and powerless nation this is a major achievement.
But if peace and reconciliation with its Arab neighbors, and especially with the Palestinians, are not achieved, this year’s celebrations will remain hollow.
