"For previous strains, such a period was enough, but now the best way is to get revaccinated in five months, and for people with chronic diseases — in four months," said the expert and called for revaccination along with the vaccination campaign.
Kryuchkov also noted that early revaccination ensures good neutralizing antibody titers.
"If a person had two vaccinations and a booster vaccine, or if they went through the disease and got vaccinated, or vaccinated and went through the disease, they received 'hybrid immunity', i.e., lots of antibodies are present, and neutralizing antibodies are enough," specified the expert.
Members of the G7 (Great Britain, Germany, Italy, Canada, USA, France and Japan) published a statement after the meeting of foreign ministers in Liverpool.
It emphasizes that Russia's "military aggression" against Ukraine "will have massive consequences and a severe cost" for Moscow, but the document did not describe specific actions.
"We, the Foreign Ministers of Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States of America and the High Representative of the European Union, are united in our condemnation of Russia's military buildup and aggressive rhetoric towards Ukraine," statement says.
Furthermore, the ministers call on Russia "to de-escalate, pursue diplomatic channels, and abide by its international commitments on the transparency of military activities," recalling the words that U.S. President Biden said in a video call with Russian President Putin on December 7.
"We confirm our support of France's and Germany's efforts in the Normandy Format on reaching full implementation of the Minsk agreements to resolve the conflict in eastern Ukraine," the Foreign Ministers of the G7 also declared.
Any use of force to change borders is strictly prohibited under international law.
They warned that "Russia should be in no doubt that further military aggression against Ukraine would have massive consequences and severe cost in response."
