<HEADLINE>
A Prophet Ignored
<P>
WARSAW: The thirteen days that Pope John Paul II spent in Poland this summer will probably be the last that he ever spends in his homeland.
What the Pope wanted to say to the Polish people, and what was understood by them appear, as the nostalgic haze of that journey fades, to have been two very different things.
<P>
Pope John Paul II began his pilgrimage in Gdansk, birthplace of Solidarity, with a remembrance mass for St. Adalbert, who introduced Poland to Catholicism some thousand years ago.
St. Adalbert's evangelism is often called the "baptism of Poland".
What the Pope sought, indeed, was nothing less than a re-baptism of our country.
In a way, he treated Poland – up to a point – as a pagan country.
His numerous sermons and speeches revealed his intention to restore Adalbert's spirit in Poland.
<P>
John Paul spoke constantly of the need for love, about the love of God, but also about love between people.
In an unprecedented visit to Poland's parliament -- indeed, his address to the Sejm was the first address to a democratic assembly John Paul II has given in the two decades of his papacy -- he even spoke about love between politicians, although he is clever enough to know that such a thing is practically impossible.
Our politicians were happy to hear that they should love each other, though when Pope left they started to quarrel about the meaning of love.
On the last day of his stay, the Pope invited the Polish President, a man with a long communist past, into the "papamobile", which also was totally unprecedented.
<P>
So, what was the meaning of the Pope's sermons and this behavior?
First, we can quote the sociologist Ralf Dahrendorf, who often says that democracy and free markets are cold things.
The Pope wanted to show that democracy can be warmed by love, or at least by the fact that real human beings participate in the making of democracy and in the free market.
What was very surprising, particularly given his finger-wagging visits to America and other rich democracies, was that the Pope did not criticize the Polish people for their robust materialism.
In a sense, John Paul II accepted Poland as it is with the hope that people will find more pleasure in democracy and in the free market when they love each other.
<P>
Secondly, the Pope recognized the most important problem of Poland and many other young democracies -- the collapse, in the face of material prosperity, of the sense of community.
Even the strongest and most important community in Poland, namely the national community, appears imperilled.
Individualism is of course a part of liberalism and Polish society is now a very liberal one, but some community feelings are necessary for free individuals to exist.
Without a sense of civic and political community, democracy becomes a hollow shell of itself, and can become dangerous as it is no longer controlled by rooted values.
<P>
But community cannot be created merely because of common interests.
As Alexis de Tocqueville taught us, community must be a community of values and of patterns of behaviour.
A community based on love need not be a society where people behave like angels.
What the Pope envisioned was a society which is not based on total lack of interest in "thy neighbor", a society of lonely grasping, but containing a certain amount of loyal, reliable friendship.
<P>
During the Pope's visit, Poles really loved each other and loved the fact that they belonged to a community, but a very short lived community of those who go to papal masses.
In the weeks since John Paul's plane left Krakow, it is clear that Poles have forgotten everything and things go on as before.
Which means they go as in a cold democracy and a brutally cold free market.
<P>
Why is this so?
Evangelical values mean little to people whose only purpose is money.
Even freedom, which in theory is important for the members of a liberal society, is not much valued in Poland.
Democracy in Poland, and probably in all postcommunist countries, was, is, and shall be the freedom to gain money.
One can argue that such is state of affairs elsewhere, but I do not think so.
In some countries, democracy is connected with values which support the welfare state or a society that takes care of its members most of the time.
This is often called "inclusion".
Inclusion in Poland is of no interest to politicians and to businessman, and love, in the Pope's words, was a form of inclusion.
<P>
Some months ago Poland faced a wave of peasant strikes.
Farmers sought more money, of course, but what they really wanted was inclusion.
Since 1989 none of the many Polish governments, which nearly always included the Peasant party (PSL), has shown any interest in a group that constitutes 38% of society.
I do not intend to praise communism, but before the Second World War 20% of university students were the offspring of peasants; now we have barely 1%.
No one tries to help young people from the provinces go to high schools and afterward to universities.
Peasants simply cannot manage in the cold free market.
So they feel utterly disconnected from the process of transformation.
<P>
Perhaps democracy must be cold as a technique of government but it cannot be cold towards its citizens.
Adam Smith, indeed, was not a theorist of the cold free market, but one of the greatest moralists of the Enlightenment.
The Pope was, therefore, right when he called for more love and was wrong when he hoped that people would listen.
Perhaps, after the first brutal generation of democratic rule, a slightly more moral society will arise and the Pope's words will be recalled from a distance.
Now they are ignored as we, solitarily, grub for the rewards of our material freedom.
