<HEADLINE>
America's Isolationist Temptation
<P>
WASHINGTON: For over a month now, I have been working at one of the best-known American think tanks, the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, funded before World War I by Andrew Carnegie, a Scottish immigrant who became one of the richest - and certainly the most generous - men in America.
At that time, the United states was just beginning to understand that their power and wealth bestowed upon them a major international responsibility.
It was this understanding which finally led them to participate in World War II and to lead the Western World to security and prosperity after that war.
<P>
But today, America is moving away from the convictions which sustained its international involvement over the past five decades.
While Washington is still an exciting city for internationalists, in terms of the number of institutions like the Carnegie Endowment and the richness of its intellectual community the last capital city of the world, the country itself is increasingly shying away from anything that smacks of international responsibility, even at the expense of its own national interests.
<P>
The most telling, and the most disturbing, evidence of this trend was recently provided by the controversy over America's support for neighboring Mexico.
That country of 93 million people is one of the only two immediate neighbors the United States have, and a problematic as well as a promising one: it produces a stream of immigrants which cause increasing social problems along the Southern border of the US, and it promises to be a major market for American goods in the future.
Hence when last December the Mexican currency, the Peso, suddenly dropped one third in value, this threatened to produce not only more immigrants but also panic in the international financial markets.
President Clinton and the leaders of Congress - both from the party that opposes Clinton - quickly agreed that a major support operation would have to be launched, the more impressive and therefore more effective if this could be done with the explicit endorsement of the Congress.
<P>
But then the unexpected happened.
Although the assistance package for Mexico so obviously corresponded to America's self-interest, the parliamentarians balked.
They were, they argued, not elected to help Mexicans but their own citizens.
The attempt to convince the that by helping Mexico through its crisis, they would also safeguard the interest of Americans fell on deaf ears.
Deprived of support by his national parliament, the President had no other choice but to pull together a package with the help of international lending organizations.
<P>
It would be nice to think that this incident was just a fluke.
Unfortunately, it confirms a pattern that has boon woven for some time: the growing conviction among a majority of Americans that they owe nothing to the world and that they can pursue their interests as if the outside world does not exist.
<P>
To be fair to Americans, all advanced industrialized countries are turning inward.
The United States, however, a continent of a country, can fool itself more easily by thinking that the only things that "matter take place within its own borders.
In addition, its system of parliamentary elections every other year inevitably pushes international affairs to the sidelines.
It condemns politicians, from the moment they are elected, to engage immediately in a new fight for every vote - and since fewer and fewer people bother to vote, the support of those that do must be solicited even more strenuously.
<P>
During the Cold War it was still possible in America to win votes with foreign policy; now that it is over, voters are, understandably, primarily if not exclusively concerned with matters at home.
Those Congressmen who argued that they were not elected to help Mexicans but only Americans were quite right.
The provincialism of the voters becomes the guideline for the politicians.
<P>
President Clinton, smelling the new mood, had already done much to "Japanize" American foreign policy: his main objective was no longer to build international order but to provide jobs for American workers and markets for American products.
The issues on which he invested most of his foreign policy energy were the agreement's on the North American Free Area and on the World Trade Organization.
But while Clinton and his team remain aware that American self-interest demands active international involvement, the new American mood is suspicious of any international involvement even if it is so clearly to America's advantage as with Mexico.
<P>
It is a mood which the rest of the world cannot ignore but must take seriously.
The United States still likes to see itself as the only superpower left but its citizens no longer want it to act like an international leader.
As a result, the rhetoric of superpower is still there but the substance is fading rapidly away.
<P>
Take the moves in the Senate to end the arms embargo against Bosnia.
I looks like an act of involvement yet in reality is an act of abandonment.
It reflects above all the desire to leave that unhappy region to itself and feel morally good nevertheless.
The draft of the respective bill expressly states that it shall "not be interpreted as an authorization for deployment of US forces in the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina for any purpose, including training, support, or delivery of military equipment".
Neither American blood nor American treasure are to be expended, just American words.
<P>
Or take the demand by the House of Representatives to invite Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic and Slovakia to join NATO.
At first glance, it looks like a firm commitment to expand NATO.
In reality, it in no way indicates that such a move will take place soon.
There is no strategy behind it, no consultation with allies, no thorough evaluation of the implications, no specific plan of the necessary steps - and no willingness to spend any money.
A senior Senator recently summed up the situation thus: if NATO expansion came to a vote in the Senate today.
The answer would be no.
The House resolution is, once again, little more than posturing.
<P>
How should the rest of the world react to an America which no longer seems to care for it?
The short answer is: don't give up.
For one, America is too intertwined with the world to opt out of it; it cannot wish international events away but has to deal with them as they arise.
And there are enough intelligent people in and outside Washington who realize this and need allies from abroad to help them turn the current mood around.
For another, the corrective mechanism which in the past has always led this country back to the path of constructive pragmatism is still functioning.
The pendulum will swing back.
The current American mood of unworldliness will not last.
But it will be around for some time.
Many shrewd Washington observers feel reminded of the early 1920's when Americans, once before, sought to opt out of international affairs.
It took Hitler's war to shake them out off their cocoon.
We can only hope that it will not take so long, and that it will not need a similarly catastrophic event, to make the pendulum swing back again.
