<HEADLINE>
Why Jeffrey Sachs Matters
<P>
SEATTLE – Bono calls the economist Jeffrey Sachs “the squeaky wheel that roars.”
To me, Sachs is the Bono ofeconomics – a guy with impressive intelligence, passion, and powers of persuasionwho is devoting his gifts to speaking up for the poorest people on the planet.So it was no surprise to me that a journalist would find Sachs to be a compellingcentral character for a book – and a good way to draw readers into the potentiallydry subject of international development.
<P>
In The Idealist, Vanity Fair writer Nina Munk draws a nuanced portrait of Sachs andhis Millennium Villages Project (MVP) – a $120 million demonstration project intendedto show the world that it’s possible to lift African villages out of poverty througha massive infusion of targeted assistance.
It would have been easy, and perhapsmore marketable, for Munk to draw a caricature, overly accentuating Sachs’snegative qualities at the expense of his great gifts.
But she doesn’t.
Munk spentsix years researching the book, getting to know Sachs well and living forextended periods in two of the 15 Millennium Villages.
She clearly appreciatesthe importance and difficulty of what Sachs and his team are attempting to do.
<P>
Unlike most booksabout international development, Munk’s book is very readable and not long (260pages).
I’ve told everyone at our foundation that I think it is worth taking thetime to read it.
It’s a valuable – and, at times, heartbreaking – cautionary tale.
Whilesome of the Millennium Villages have succeeded in helping families improvetheir health and incomes, Munk concludes that the two villages she spent themost time studying­ – Dertu, Kenya and Ruhiira, Uganda – have so far not lived upto Sachs’s vision.
<P>
Sachs didcome to the foundation, asking us to support the Millennium Villages.
His pitchwas intriguing.
He was picking a small handful of villages to be the focus of intenseinterventions in health, education, and agriculture – all at once.
His hypothesiswas that these interventions would be so synergistic that they would start avirtuous upward cycle and lift the villages out of poverty for good.
He feltthat if you focus just on fertilizer without also addressing health, or if youjust go in and provide vaccinations without doing anything to help improve education,then progress won’t be sustained without an endless supply of aid.
<P>
My colleaguesand I had a number of concerns about Sachs’s approach.
We questioned hisassumptions about how quickly the gains would materialize, what would happen whenthe MVP funding was phased out, how much governments would contribute to offsetthe high per-person costs, and how feasible it was to measure progress (giventhe likelihood that peoplefrom the surrounding area would stream into their villages once the MVP aidstarted flowing).
So wedecided not to invest in the MVP directly.
Instead we funded hisinterdisciplinary work at Columbia University’s Earth Institute, because wefelt it was invaluable to have him focused on the needs of poor countries.
<P>
Based on whatMunk reports about the MVP, I’m not about to throw stones.
We have manyprojects of our own that have come up short.
It’s hard to deliver effectivesolutions, even when you plan for every potential contingency and unintendedconsequence.
There is a natural tendency in almost any kind of investment – business,philanthropic, or otherwise – to double down in the face of difficulty.
I’ve doneit, and I think most other people have too.
<P>
So what wentwrong?
For one thing, the villages that Sachs picked experienced all kinds of problems – fromdrought to political unrest.
For another, the MVP began with an idealistic “Field of Dreams” approach.
MVP leadersencouraged farmers to switch to a series of new crops that were in demand inricher countries – and experts on the ground did a good job of helping farmers toproduce good crop yields by using fertilizer, irrigation, and better seeds.
Butthe MVP didn’t simultaneously invest in developing markets for these crops.According to Munk, “Pineapple couldn’t be exported after all, because the costof transport was far too high.
There was no market for ginger, apparently.
Anddespite some early interest from buyers in Japan, no one wanted banana flour.”
Thefarmers grew the crops, but the buyers didn’t come.
<P>
Of course,Sachs knows that it’s critical to understand market dynamics; he’s one of theworld’s smartest economists.
But in the villages Munk profiled, Sachs seems tobe wearing blinders.
<P>
WarrenBuffett likes to say, “Therear-view mirror is always clearer than the windshield.”
Through that rear-viewmirror, we can see that theproject didn’t have an economic model that could sustain successes once the MVPdollars ran out.
All of the interventions involved – health, agriculture,infrastructure, education, and business seed money – make sense if carried out carefully,over time.
But I am surprised by how little Sachs duginto country budgets and that he didn’t work to convince governments to committo additional taxation to fund more of these interventions domestically.
Givenhis background, he surely excels in that area.
<P>
Through therear-view mirror, we can also see that many of Sachs’s ideas have proved to be exactlyright.
Munk details his 2007 fight with international aid donors who wererefusing to distribute insecticide-treated bed nets for free because theyfavored a market-based approach where people would pay a small amount for eachnet.
To put it mildly, Sachs didn’t make any friends in the process ofadvancing his case for free bed nets.
Through increasingly ruthless tirades, hewound up alienating potential allies who want to defeat malaria just as badlyas he does.
But history will show that Sachs was absolutely right.
Since then,we’ve seen that the free model has allowed for much broader distribution of bednets – and much greater reductions in malaria – than market models.
<P>
In the end, Ihope poverty fighters will not let what they read in this book stop them frominvesting and taking risks.
Inthe world of venture capital, a success rate of 30 percent is considered agreat track record.
In the world of international development, critics hold up everymisstep as proof that aid is like throwing money down a rat hole.
When you’retrying to do something as hard as fighting poverty and disease, you will neverachieve anything meaningful if you’re afraid to make mistakes.
<P>
I greatlyadmire Sachs for putting his ideas and reputation on the line.
After all, he couldhave a good life doing nothing more than teaching two classes a semester andpumping out armchair advice in academic journals.
But that’s not his style.
Herolls up his sleeves.
He puts his theories into action.
He drives himself ashard as anyone I know.
<P>
I have no doubt that Sachs, like all relentlessthinkers and doers, will come back with stronger ideas and approaches.
Sachswill always be a squeaky wheel that roars.
And the world will be a better placefor it.
