<HEADLINE>
Brazil: Another International Bailout Failure?
<P>
CAMBRIDGE: The emerging markets crisis has jumped across the Atlantic Ocean, to engulf Brazil and several other Latin American countries.
Forecasts of economic growth are being marked down sharply.
A couple of months ago, most forecasters expected that Brazil would achieve positive economic growth in 1999.
The consensus is now that Brazil will fall into recession.
As in Asia, the IMF is riding to the rescue, sponsoring a huge international bailout loan.
But as in Asia, the IMF’s recipes could easily do more harm than good, forcing Brazil into an even deeper abyss than it finds itself in right now.
<P>
In the interpretation of the IMF and Brazil, there are two main problems facing the Brazilian economy.
The first problem is a large budget deficit, estimated to be around 7 percent of the gross domestic product.
This, everybody agrees, needs to be reduced sharply, since Brazil is having a very difficult time financing that deficit, either through domestic or foreign borrowing.
The second problem is the international financial panic.
Foreign investors are fleeing from the Brazil, just as they have from Asia and Russia.
This is pushing up interest rates and threatening the value of the currency.
<P>
The IMF’s remedy is a large international loan to Brazil, combined with a pledge by the Brazilian Government to cut its budget deficit sharply.
The IMF is rounding up the money from the usual sources: its own funds, the World Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank, foreign governments, and to a modest extent, foreign commercial banks.
<P>
The big problem is that the IMF has (once again) ignored a major source of Brazil’s current economic crisis -- perhaps the most important source.
Brazil’s currency, the Real, is heavily overvalued, perhaps by 30 to 40 percent.
This means that domestic wages and prices in Brazil, when translated into U.S. dollars at the current exchange, are too high for Brazil to be competitive in international markets.
The Brazilian Government is sustaining the exchange rate at an artificially strong level by intervening in the foreign exchange market.
(More specifically, it is letting the exchange rate lose a little value each year, around 7 percent vis-a-vis the U.S. dollar).
Since the end of August, the Central Bank has sold an estimated $25 billion of foreign exchange reserves to defend the currency.
Total reserves have dropped from around $70 billion to the current level of around $45 billion, and they seem set to drop further.
<P>
There are two consequences of the Brazilian policy to defend the exchange rate, a policy that has been strongly backed by the International Monetary Fund.
First, Brazil has to keep interest rates very high in order to prevent capital flight, since there are widespread (and realistic) fears that Brazil will eventually have to devalue the exchange rate.
Second, the overvaluation together with the resulting high interest rates is causing Brazil to fall into recession.
Both exports and domestic demand are suffering as a result of these policies, resulting in a sharp rise of unemployment.
<P>
The Brazilian Government and the IMF are now gambling that with a large international loan to Brazil, the speculators will stop attacking the currency, and things will go back to normal.
It is a strange gamble, since even with the international loan, the Brazilian currency will remain overvalued, and everybody will still know that.
Moreover, the Government and the IMF are gambling that newly re-elected President Fernando Henrique Cardoso will win domestic and international confidence by a strong program of cutting the budget deficit.
<P>
Once again, the IMF position defies logic.
If the exchange rate is held constant, and budget spending is cut sharply, Brazil will be thrown into a deep recession.
That will hurt tax revenues and keep the budget deficit very large anyway.
Moreover, as a second-term, lame-duck President, presiding over a recession, and in a complicated Federal system with powerful state Governors, President Cardoso is unlikely to maintain much political power and support for his austerity policies.
<P>
The better policy approach is clear.
Brazil should devalue the exchange to a much more realistic level.
It could then cut interest rates as well, since it would no longer have to defend an overvalued currency.
Brazil’s international bank creditors should simultaneously be encouraged to roll over their short-term claims.
If the banks were to panic, and to try suddenly to withdraw their money, both Brazil and the international banks will be losers.
The IMF and the U.S. Government could play a useful role in helping the international banks to coordinate a rollover of debts.
If both of these steps were taken, then there would be a case for some loans from the IMF, World Bank, and other official agencies, but on a much smaller scale than what the IMF has arranged.
<P>
After four failed bailout plans in the past fifteen months (Indonesia, Korea, Thailand, and Russia), the IMF is verging on a fifth failure.
This one, if it occurs, will be devastating to that Institution, since the IMF would have walked again into a trap of its own making.
We can only hope that the IMF begins to see better alternatives to its failed policies.
As for the emerging markets, they should follow two simple rules.
First, allow their exchange rates to be flexible, and keep a tight limit on short-term borrowing from abroad.
