<HEADLINE>
China Is Not The Next Domino
<P>
BEIJING: True, China’s economic system is riddled with many of the problems that trouble its neighbors – countless bad loans by state banks, government manipulation of financial markets, real estate bubbles.
Some of these may be even more serious in China than elsewhere.
Yet, so far, China seems immunized from the fate of its neighbors.
<P>
Why?
One reason is that China’s financial markets are mostly closed: investment by foreigners in Chinese securities, for example, is limited to B class shares.
In addition, China’s currency is not convertible on capital accounts; only a few foreign banks are allowed to operate, and only in certain regions; and no foreign off-shore banks operate in China.
Portfolio investment, which was among the first types of funds to flee Asia, claims only a small share of the $320 billion of the foreign capital that has flowed into China.
<P>
Moreover, most investments are in manufacturing.
Less than 10% of the capital that has flowed into China is in short-term borrowings of the sort that bedeviled Korea.
Of China’s $116 billion in foreign debt, indeed, less that 10% is short term.
Of course, by limiting foreign access China excluded itself from the full benefits of international capital flows in recent years.
But these restrictions also made China less vulnerable to international speculation – at least for now.
<P>
Rather than wait for outside pressure to force it to act, in late 1993 China began its own macroeconomic retrenchments and market reforms.
This early action is the second factor delivering some immunity from today’s crisis.
A "soft-landing" for an overheated economy has been achieved, and most internal and external balances are restored.
Inflation fell from 24% in 1994 to 0.4% in October, 1997; trade and current account surpluses have been increasing since 1993; foreign reserve continue to grow and now top $140 billion.
<P>
Trouble does exist.
Real estate bubbles remain, though in Hanan, and Beihai they did burst spectacularly.
The deteriorating finances of state enterprises, and the vast non-performing assets of state banks are threats that will not be resolved for years.
Corporate restructuring, just starting, will also be painful.
So, if China encounters a crisis, it will be domestic in nature, not one inspired by a run on the currency or by balance of payments difficulties, at least not soon.
<P>
Still, Asia’s crisis poses challenges to China.
Since June, many Southeast Asian currencies have fallen over 50% against the US dollar.
China’s currency, however, actually appreciated during this period (and Hong Kong’s dollar survived a string of speculative attacks).
So although the immediate effects of the region’s financial contagion have been slight, the changing relations among the region’s currencies mean that long term problems are probably unavoidable.
<P>
The first of these may come through changes in China’s terms of trade.
China and the ASEAN economies compete aggressively to export labor-intensive manufactured goods to developed markets.
Between 1989 and 1994, China’s share of the imports of developed countries outpaced its ASEAN neighbors.
Although China’s currency was devalued by about 10% in 1994, since then it has appreciated by more than 30% in real terms, due to substantial inflation.
This means that, even before the onset of financial crisis, China’s exports had already become progressively more expensive.
<P>
In the face of this, China’s central bank faces some hard choices.
For as China confronts deterioration in its terms of trade, its currency is under pressure to rise because both current and capital accounts are in surplus, and foreign exchange reserves are growing.
Indeed, the latter now stand at more than 15% of GDP.
<P>
The hits Chinese exports are likely to take as a result of the region’s currency depreciations are, nevertheless, unlikely to be felt immediately.
Rival Asian economies will need to be stabilized before they can push their exports aggressively.
Moreover, inflation in some ASEAN countries may rise with the coming of floating exchange rates.
Because of this, the price competitiveness of their exports may be lessened.
As inflation goes down even more in China, the pressures on its currency to appreciate will slacken.
China should use this brief period to mount even more structural changes, and upgrade its exports.
<P>
A second negative impact possible in today’s crisis may come about because of falling foreign direct investment.
Although China’s now stable economy appears an attractive place for Western capital, particularly when compared to the rest of Asia, investment into China from other countries in the region – say, Korea – is decreasing fast and will likely stay down even after today’s financial troubles pass..
<P>
International investors will also need time before their confidence in Asia recovers.
Some will wait and watch for a while.
China, where foreign direct investment accounts for about 20% of total fixed assets, will suffer if capital inflows drop substantially.
But there may be an opportunity in this, too.
China should seize the opportunity presented by this threat to promote sound domestic capital markets, and enhance domestic savings.
Only by establishing capital markets capable of funding an increasing share of China’s growth from domestic sources will today’s temporary immunities prove more lasting.
