<HEADLINE>
Clinton's Second Term And The American Economy
<P>
NEW HAVEN: Bill Clinton could not have asked for a better election year economy: unemployment averaging 5.2%, the lowest since 1973; 10.7 million new jobs since 1992, a gain of 9%; inflation steady at around 3%; a stock market booming and low interest rates; consumer and business confidence high; the budget deficit cut four years in a row, falling 63% to $107billion, 1.4% of gdp.
"Are you better off than four years ago?"
Clinton asked the voters, and they answered "Yes."
<P>
Presidents get credit and blame for whatever happens, whether deserved or not.
Alan Greenspan's Federal Reserve deserves credit for managing the 1992-96 recovery from the "Bush recession."
Many inflation hawks, some inside the Fed, thought unemployment rates below 6% were dangerous, but Greenspan let unemployment fall towards pre-1970 rates as long as prices and wages remain well-behaved.
<P>
For deficit reduction, Clinton can claim credit.
Early on, Treasury secretary Robert Rubin persuaded him to concentrate on deficit reduction, scrapping a middle class tax cut and planned public investment initiatives.
Clinton's fiscal package attacking the deficit passed Congress without a single Republican vote.
The economy recovered, the bond market cheered, and middle class voters didn't revolt.
<P>
In macroeconomic performance, the US is the most successful advanced economy.
America meets all the Maastricht criteria for monetary union, which no actual EU member (save Luxembourg) can claim.
<P>
What now?
The prospects are for continued strong macroeconomic performance.
Recovery is evolving into sustainable growth, with low inflation and low unemployment.
No inflation shocks that might provoke the Fed to slam on the breaks loom.
Yet, as Clinton starts "building a bridge to the 21st century", he and the nation face some difficult economic problems.
<P>
First, the sustainable growth rate is pitifully low, not more than 2.5% per year, compared to 4% in the golden age 1946-72.
Demographic slowdowns of labor force growth account for some of the difference.
What is disturbing is the post-1972 slowdown in productivity, from 2.5% to 1%.
This translates into anemic growth in real wages, for many workers stagnant or declining wages.
<P>
Dissatisfaction with slow growth is widespread.
Republicans unsuccessfully tried to exploit it, reviving the Reagan era's "supply side claims that tax cuts raise growth substantially and permanently.
This time the public didn't bite.
But speeding up growth remains a priority.
It takes more savings and investment, better education and training, and innovative research and development.
Government policy tools are limited, and results come unspectacularly.
<P>
Second, inequality of income and wealth in the US, already more pronounced than in other advanced democracies, has been increasing dramatically.
The percent of families and especially children living in poverty remains disturbingly high.
Many unskilled jobs pay ever lower wages.
Income differentials associated with higher education have risen dramatically.
No one knows what to do; many conservatives see no problem.
<P>
American workers compete with low-wage labor abroad and with immigrants at home.
In the 1996 presidential campaign, resentments and exaggerations of import competition surfaced in economic nationalism, espoused by Pat Buchanan and Ross Perot on the right and trade union leaders on the left.
President Clinton remains committed to the internationalist trade policies of his first term (NAFTA, GATT), combined with bilateral negotiations to "open foreign markets."
He can probably count on the leadership of both parties in Congress here.
Immigration is another story.
The President agreed to some restrictive legislation he would like to reverse; this will be a contentious issue with Republicans.
<P>
Third, the President and both parties in Congress are committed to balancing the budget in 2002.
The economic purpose is to re-channel private saving from deficits to productivity enhancing investments.
Standard economics says that this switch will, at least temporarily and modestly, augment growth -- provided that the Fed makes sure that fiscal cutbacks are not wasted in recession and unemployment, and that expenditure cuts are not in public investments with high social productivity.
Clinton would like to squeeze expenditures on education, environment, science, technology, and infrastructure into his budgets.
<P>
Budget room will be scarce for many other worthwhile programs, among them: aid to poor countries, where the US is scandalously stingy; paying dues in arrears to the UN; creating jobs for mothers who will, under the cruel welfare "reform" Clinton signed in 1996, be denied public assistance for themselves and their children.
<P>
Budget balance in 2002 is well within reach.
But entitlements for the elderly, Social Security and Medicare, threaten severe fiscal imbalances later in the next century.
The issues are hypersensitive, but President Clinton and both parties in Congress are under great pressure to agree on long-run solutions.
<P>
Fourth, health care reform may return to the national agenda.
Clinton's revolutionary proposal failed in Congress and contributed to the Republican sweep of 1994.
The problems still exist.
The number of Americans with no medical insurance is 20% and rising.
Many families feel insecure about the availability and cost of unregulated private insurance.
<P>
For President Clinton, the objective of the first term was re-election, and the objective of the second term must be his place in history.
How will he mark it?
Foreign policy?
After a slow start, Clinton had his successes.
But the intractable regional crises in the world today are land mines for the leader of the one superpower, especially when his own public is turning inward.
Domestic policy?
In the campaign, he spoke eloquently of America's future but confined himself to a few modest and inexpensive proposals, mainly tax concessions and subsidies for children, students, and schools.
Lacking any major innovation that could carry his name, like Franklin Roosevelt's Social Security or Lyndon Johnson's Medicare, Bill Clinton may have to settle for competent management of the status quo.
Unfortunately, the next four years may well be dominated by allegations of wrongdoing by the President, Mrs. Clinton, and their associates in Arkansas and Washington.
