<HEADLINE>
Do Markets Now Love The Left?
<P>
LONDON: It is often said that the power of global financial markets far exceeds the mandate of any government.
Left wing politicians everywhere fear the "Gnomes of Zurich" and Wall Street.
Recent events, however, suggest that the left has less to fear from international finance than they once supposed.
<P>
Here the markets' reaction to the Left's April victory in Italy highlights a worldwide trend.
Not only does Italy now have the first West European government led by a former communist party, but this development has been embraced by businessmen, investors, and financial speculators at home and abroad.
In the month after the Left's win, the lira rose almost 10% against the D-mark, the Milan bourse jumped 12% and longterm interest rates fell.
<P>
Financial capital's flirtation with the Left is not unique to Italy.
Wall Street has soared under Democrat Bill Clinton.
In Britain, markets seem to relish the prospect that the Conservatives will lose power after 17 years.
In France, by contrast, President Chirac's election last year was greeted immediately by a franc crisis.
Only in Germany does a conservative government enjoy support from financial markets -- and that may be explained by the fact that Helmut Kohl's policies are far removed from traditional rightwing policies.
<P>
So have the Gnomes of Zurich developed a social conscience?
Has the Left strayed so far from its socialist roots that there is nothing left of them?
<P>
Events in Italy shed light on these questions.
Two reasons reveal why markets celebrated: Communists were more likely to deliver stable government than the right; and, Communists were determined to act on the huge budget deficit that cast the shadow of bankruptcy over an economy that would otherwise have qualified as the most successful major economy after Japan.
Parallels to these reasons exist in America and Britain.
<P>
The Left may be more stable because it is more disciplined than the Right.
Discipline comes from fear: leftwing politicians everywhere knew that their movement faced extinction.
The only chance at salvation was to make a success of their next turn in government.
Fail, and the next election could be their last.
<P>
Meanwhile, the Right has become increasingly complacent and arrogant of its monopoly on power.
Like all monopolists, the ascendancy of the Right produced inefficiency, corruption, and self-indulgence.
Just s the Left has become more disciplined, the right has become prone to factionalism and ideological fantasy.
<P>
Nowhere has this contrast been more apparent than in economic and budgetary policy.
This is what explains the unexpected preference of global markets for parties of the Left.
All of the main capitalist economies have severe budget problems; all need to cut spending or raise taxes.
Traditionally, this would have been a task entrusted to the Right.
Today it is clear that the Left generally has a clearer vision of what is to be done.
<P>
Instinctively the Left is more willing to raise taxes, and less likely to cut taxes irresponsibly in the manner of American Republicans.
The Left also has a better chance of making lasting cuts in social programs.
Just as it often takes rightwing nationalists to make peace with revolutionaries -- for example in Israel and South Africa -- it takes social democrats to make sweeping reforms in the welfare state.
<P>
If the Left says welfare must be cut, the public is more likely to accept this than if the same stricture came from the Right.
Cuts made by the Right are ideological; cuts made by the Left are inevitable.
Cuts made by the Right are usually accompanied by claims that they will make everyone better off.
Cuts made by the Left are acknowledged to be painful.
Once the Left accepts that the welfare state must be cut and deficits reduced, it is more likely to deliver lasting results than the Right.
<P>
Here is an illustration of one of the oldest principles of democratic governance -- great reforms are likely to be successfully implemented only by those who oppose them.
Just as only Begin could make peace with Egypt, de Klerk turn South Africa into a multi-racial society, and KGB apparatchik named Andropov to lay the foundations of perestroika and glasnost, so it may take socialists to reduce the welfare state to manageable size and former communists to restore sound financial management to capitalist countries nearly ruined by rightwing regimes -- whether by corruption, as in Italy, or by ideological fantasy, as in America and Britain.
<P>
We now live in a world where former communists must take pride in becoming successful managers of a capitalist economy.
Their only hope of staying in power is to work with capital, rather than against it.
Experience suggests that financial investors are less interested in ideology than in results.
A leftwing government that can manage a capitalist economy better than a rightwing one will have this success acknowledged by financial markets.
If socialists can prove to be efficient capitalists, the Gnomes of Zurich will be happy to count the profits and let them stay in power.
