<HEADLINE>
EMU: Risky But Worth It
<P>
STOCKHOLM: Europe is now preparing for a new currency - the euro.
Advocates of EMU argue that adoption of a single currency will have many positive effects, both at the micro and the macro level.
At the “micro” level, the transaction costs and uncertainties imposed on all businesses by the daily exchange of one currency for another are supposed to decrease, delivering large gains in efficiency as a result.
At the “macro” level, the main effect is assumed to be lower interest rates, with positive effects on European investment and economic growth.
<P>
Although these positive effects might be substantial, few professional economists see them as sufficient to motivate the abolition of today’s exchange rate system.
Most economists point out that Europe is not an optimal currency area.
This is mainly because the region’s labor market is too rigid and thus unable to handle external shocks.
The European labor force is extremely immobile and continental labor unions are very conservative.
If, for example, one region or country in a future European currency area is badly affected by, say, a relative fall in the prices of their exports, and workers refuse to either move to where there are jobs, or adjust their salaries (downward) to the new situation, a rise in unemployment is unavoidable.
<P>
Thus, as it stands today, EMU could be compared to a pressure cooker without any relief valve built in.
There are, no doubt, substantial risks of increased unemployment in the backwash of monetary unification, particularly when you factor in the already high unemployment levels in most European countries.
So, given the weakness of many governments, the probability that the whole EMU project will collapse is very great.
<P>
A quick look at recent European history confirms this fear.
Two earlier attempts at closer monetary cooperation in Europe, the Werner Plan initiated in 1971 and the European Monetary System (EMS) of 1979, both failed.
The likelihood of another, sharper failure has not diminished, because no significant “relief valves” have been introduced.
<P>
Despite this, I think that EMU is good for Europe.
My argument is as follows.
The same factors that made Europe a sub-optimal currency area have also led to a steep erosion in European competitiveness over the past decades.
But Europe’s rigid labor markets and other weaknesses are not immutable, God-given characteristics of the Continent’s economy.
Instead, they were established because of decades of promiscuously interventionist economic policies.
<P>
Over the past decades, various interest groups staked out powerful claims to protection and subsidies, while ambitious politicians regulated most areas of the European economy.
Business became simply the continuation of politics by other means.
These politically imposed weaknesses and distortions are today so deeply embedded in Europe’s political economy that there is little hope that the system can cure itself.
Bitter medicine is needed—perhaps a dose of EMU will provide the cure.
<P>
Monetary integration would weaken the existing distortions, reduce the scope for political intervention, and force European firms to become more competitive.
The positive impact on European competitiveness will come from two sources:
<P>
 First, as a result of the increasing internal competition.
With “one market” and “one currency” prices cannot differ too much between EU member states.
Thus, with a single currency we will see lower prices on goods as well as services throughout Europe.
Not only that.
Wage levels will also have to adapt to the new situation and labor unions will be forced to become more realistic in their demands.
Taken all together, this will lead to increasing competition and more efficient European firms.
<P>
 Second, as a result of increasing external competition.
With EMU in place, the performance of the EU’s member countries must be measured within a global context, rather than merely a European one.
This, of course, will constitute a dramatic change in the ways in which firms operate.
Today, many European firms aim to be as good as the best German, Swedish, or British firms.
But in looking at only their European competitors, they risk falling behind in the global race.
In future, the yardsticks for performance will be found in Japan and the United States, and that means increased competition for European firms.
<P>
In the short run, this will be a cold shower for European business.
Restructuring companies and industries takes time and is likely to result in lay-offs.
On the other hand, one can always hope that the institutional changes, made necessary by the single currency project, will make Europe more capable of handling these structural changes.
In the long run, these changes will be necessary anyway if Europe is not to fall further behind the United States, Japan, and other more dynamic economies.
<P>
Yet there is reason to be skeptical in regards to the eventual success of the EMU project.
For one thing, we cannot know how long and how painful the necessary adjustments will prove to be.
Evidence from Germany’s reunification and the Eastern European integration process suggest that the costs may be substantial and long-running.
Another problem is that democracy might not accept such bitter medicine.
Given the already high unemployment levels that exist across much of the Continent, and the already heavy pressures on government finances, European voters may be unwilling to accept more adjustments and the hardships they appear to bring, no matter the proposed long-term benefits.
<P>
In conclusion, I am quite pessimistic as to the chances that EMU, if the common currency starts as planned on January 1, 1999, will fly for long.
But given the alternatives, I think it is worth trying.
