<HEADLINE>
Europe As A Spiritual Task
<P>
PRAGUE: One of the great European traditions -- a tradition forgotten through much of this century -- is the idea of the free citizen as the source of all political power.
<P>
Although European integration began primarily as economic integration, its political objectives included a renaissance of that civic principle as the only reliable basis for peaceful cooperation among nations.
Suppression of national identity or national consciousness -- natural dimensions of identity -- was not the goal.
People, instead, were to be freed from bondage to national collectivism, that fount of strife and enslaver of individuality.
European unification never meant to limit freedom by expropriating individual rights in favor of a distant supranational power.
European integration, instead, enhances freedom not only by liberating people from fear of others but also by offering ever more room for individual self-realization as citizens.
<P>
Only now, with the EU contemplating its future shape and discussing a common foreign and security policy, are Europeans and European politicians poised to recognize the magnitude of the philosophical dimension of European unification.
I wonder whether some of them are not a little daunted by the greatness of the work that has been undertaken and whose profound meaning is emerging.
Loss of courage to pursue the deeper goals of union will be the more dangerous now that Europe -- for the first time in history -- has the chance to order itself as a whole on the basis of liberating, democratic principles.
<P>
The concept of a metaphysically anchored sense of responsibility has been one of the cornerstone values underlying the European tradition.
This historic moment invites us to rededicate ourselves to this European tradition as well, and to admit clearly that there are values that transcend our immediate interest, that we are not accountable solely to our party, our voters, our lobbies or our state but, in fact, to all humanity, including those who come after us, and that the decision on the worth of our deeds will ultimately be made beyond the realm around us.
This means nothing less than to harken, in our various dilemmas, to the voice that speaks to us from the depths of our conscience.
<P>
In a somewhat exalted way, we might say that Europe’s task today is to rediscover its conscience and its sense of responsibility in the deepest sense of the word, not just with regard to its own political architecture but also with regard to the world and its moral dimensions.
<P>
We all know the threats hanging over today's world.
We know that our planet's resources are limited and that the idea of incessant economic growth may clash with these limits.
We know of the growing populations of the poor and the stagnating populations of the rich.
We know how we are destroying the air and waters that surround us.
We know how many potential conflicts lie dormant now that a single global civilization is pushing people from different cultural spheres ever closer together, arousing their will to defend their identity against this pressure to conform.
<P>
But what do we do to resist these dangers?
We withdraw into our shells, assuring ourselves that this or that is not our affair.
As if we had entirely forgotten the "judge above the stars" of whom Schiller spoke and the European anthem daily reminds us.
As if, while constantly talking about Europe, we were entirely forgetting one of the pillars of the European spiritual tradition -- universalism, the commandment that we should think of everyone, act the way all should act, and look for universally acceptable solutions.
<P>
Humanity is entering an era of multipolar and multicultural civilization.
Europe no longer conducts the global orchestra.
But this does not mean it has played out its role and has nothing to say to the world.
A new task presents itself, and with it a new substance for Europe's existence.
That task will no longer be to spread -- violently or non-violently -- European religion or civilization, Europe’s inventions or its power.
Nor will it be to preach to the world about the rule of law, democracy, human rights or justice.
<P>
If Europe wants it can do something more modest, yet more beneficial.
Through the model of its very being it can serve as an example that diverse peoples can work together in peace without losing any part of their identity; through its behavior, it can show that it is possible to treat our planet considerately and think of the generations that will succeed us; it can demonstrate that it is possible to live together in peace with other cultures without a person or state needing to renounce their truths in the process.
<P>
If Europe wants it has one more possibility: to remind itself of its best spiritual traditions and the roots of theses traditions, to look for what these have in common with the roots of other cultures and spheres of civilization and to join forces with others in a search for a common spiritual and moral minimum to guide us all so that we may live next to one another on one planet and jointly confront whatever threatens our life together.
<P>
The only meaningful task for the Europe of the next century is to resurrect and imbue its life with its best spiritual traditions and thus help shape creatively a new pattern of global coexistence.
We shall do most for the world if we simply do as we are bidden by our conscience.
Perhaps we will inspire someone as we do so; perhaps we won't.
But we should not calculate on that outcome.
It may be difficult to part with the belief that it makes no sense to live by a spiritual imperative so long as others do not live by it, but it is possible.
Indeed, the best thing Europe can do for itself as it reinvents its political dimensions, is to work for the restoration of its spiritual identity, for the moral consciousness to guide its own new dawn.
