<HEADLINE>
Europe's Defense Investment Gap
<P>
Foreign policy disputes between Europe, France in particular, and the US are mounting, and not only over the Israeli-Palestinian bloodbath and the conduct of the anti-terrorism war.
But Europe's criticisms, no matter how sound, will not be taken seriously by the US so long as the Continent continues to free-ride on America's defenses, something it has done for half-a-century.
In a bellicose world, a credible voice in the international arena requires a creditable military capability and high-tech military technology.
In both, Europe is lacking.
<P>
America's irritation with some of its European allies - Tony Blair's UK being the noticeable exception - is understandable.
In the current fiscal year, the US will spend an additional $50 billion on defense, raising its overall defense bill to $379 billion, more than 3% of GDP.
This sum is, in fact, low by post-WWII standards.
At the time of the Gulf War of 1991, US defense spending was 4.8% of GDP; it was far higher in the 1950s and 1960s.
<P>
Europe's commitment to defense tells another story.
Defense spending is 1.6% of GDP in Germany, 2% in Italy, and 1.5% in Spain; only France and the UK reach 3%.
But confining discussion about defense commitment to the percent of GDP spent on the military is insufficient because there are economies of scale in defense spending.
So one would expect that smaller countries will spend proportionally more on defense than larger ones.
Instead, today America alone spends more than most of its NATO allies combined, and defense spending in the US is likely to increase even more in the years to come.
<P>
Security and global influence are not the only benefits that come through military expenditure.
About 10-15% of US military spending finances basic research and thus provides a powerful boost to America's high-tech research and development.
The internet, based on thinking and spending made in the 1940's, and the silicon chip, developed in the 1970's, are both products of research funded by the Pentagon.
<P>
The war in Afghanistan, which was truly revolutionary in the way it was conducted, proves how new information and communication technology can bring about success with a minimal number of men on the ground and minimal losses.
The Russians fought for ten hard years over the same terrain in Afghanistan.
Lacking comparable technology, they lost tens of thousands of men and were eventually defeated.
At the beginning of the Afghan campaign many military "experts" feared that the US would face a similar fate.
How wrong they were!
<P>
Europe lags behind the US in R&D, and its stinginess over defense contributes mightily to a growing high tech "investment gap."
Data concerning patents documents America's advantage: in the late 1990s 56% of all global patents in high-tech fields was granted to US applicants, only 11% to EU applicants.
The connection between R&D and growth is too obvious to doubt that Europe's sluggish economies are a direct result of European backwardness at innovation - and that this in turn may reflect the absence of critical military spending to drive investments in research and development.
<P>
The ongoing dispute between Europe and the US over the choice of the military transport plane -to be used to deploy the new 60,000 strong European Rapid Reaction Force - is symptomatic of Europe's problems.
America would like Europe to opt for an aircraft built by Boeing and Lockheed Martin.
Europe is divided: some countries, notably Italy, support the US; others, notably France and Germany, argue in favor of a European plane built by Airbus in a $15 billion publicly funded project.
<P>
This is an issue on which Europe should stand up to the US.
The EU should fund the Airbus project and make sure that an important fraction of the money goes into R&D to foster the growth of an industry that is one of the few European high-tech success stories.
<P>
But where should the funds needed to pay for this huge investment come from?
In recent weeks European defense ministers suggested that increases in military expenditures should be excluded from the budget constraints imposed by the Euro stability pact.
The idea that a sharp increase in military spending in a (hopefully temporarily) bellicose world should be amortized with some deficits is consistent with sound economic policy, but only if the rest of the budget remains "lean."
<P>
This is the case in America, where nobody really worries if increased military spending will create a temporary deficit.
Not in Europe.
An increase in military spending, in conjunction with an enforcement of the stability pact, should bring about a trimming of the non-defense budget: the public sector wage bill and a welfare state grown far beyond the goal of supporting the incomes of the poor, would of necessity need to be trimmed sharply.
<P>
For half-a-century Europe has relied on the US for security, while spending its own money on a pricey welfare state.
This can no longer continue - at least not if the EU is serious about playing a leading role in the world.
This is not a pleasant message, but what happened in New York and Washington on September 11 th and what is happening in the Middle East is not pleasant either: Europe should realize that change is needed and act accordingly.
