<HEADLINE>
Expansion Equals Stability
<P>
MUNICH: As turbulence mounts to Europe’s East and America’s West, the only region in the world that still retains a high degree of stability is the only one linking the members of the two chief structures of Western cooperation, Nato and the European Union.
If stability is not to stop there, it is necessary for both organizations to rethink their policy for admitting new members, and fast.
<P>
Formally, it is true, both the EU and the Nato have long been committed to opening their doors to the new democracies of Eastern and South Eastern Europe that were born after the Soviet glacier receded.
Every communique from Brussels says that "the door is open".
Somehow, however, a deep ditch is located just in front of the door which makes it difficult for newcomers to get in.
<P>
Yes, a few lucky ones have made it through ditch and door.
Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic will soon take their seat at the Nato Council.
But instead of preparing for the accession of others to follow them, the prevailing view among Nato governments, not least in the United States, is now to widen the ditch in front of the entrance door, not to fill it.
The preference clearly is that the first new members should, for the time being at least, also be the last.
<P>
In the EU, too, scepticism about enlargement has been deepening for some time.
If EU member states once seemed to grasp the strategic advantage of strengthening their own stability by extending it to the countries to their East eager to join they now have second thoughts.
Will enlargement not threaten their well being by opening them to cheap competition and labor?
Will it not deprive in particular the Southern member states of the subsidies so generously handed out by the EU’s structural fund?
Will it not demand more financial sacrifices from the countries of Western Europe at a time when unemployment is high and the turbulence on international markets is likely to bite into exports?
<P>
The result of these doubts is not only to drag out the current EU negotiations with Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Slovenia and Cyprus.
It has also pushed all the other candidates into an even more remote waiting room.
The EU, once so far-sighted, seems to have lost both generosity and strategic sense.
<P>
Yet both are needed now if the Atlantic region is to continue to enjoy the remarkable stability that has for so long been its hallmark.
It cannot exist as an island of tranquility.
Russia’s tragic decline into what can only be a protracted period of political uncertainty and economic depression already affects the countries towards its West, spreading economic concerns and raising fears that the big neighbor might compensate for internal weakness by external bullying.
A wobbly Russia will shake Eastern Europe and can rattle all of Europe.
<P>
It is time, therefore, for Western governments to remember the strategic rationale for enlargement.
It was never to isolate Russia but to stabilize democratic Europe.
That need is now pressing.
Both Nato and the EU should accelerate the process of enlargement, not delay it.
<P>
For Nato, this means to address specifically the issue of the "second wave" at its April 1999 Summit.
This cannot be done by some cosmetic clause; instead it requires a precise date when serious negotiations will start with Romania and Slovenia; the "second wave" does not have to include all other potential candidates but it does have to demonstrate that the process of enlargement will not stop.
<P>
For the EU, it means to seek ways to include all the applicant countries even before they can become full members of the common internal market.
What makes the entrance negotiation invariably cumbersome and protracted, is the immense adaptation that new members must make to become truly integrated in the supranational body of laws and decision-procedures which are the essence of the EU.
But beyond that, much of the EU business is of a purely intergovernmental nature, such as immigration or foreign policy.
There is no reason why candidates should not sit and decide with the others in the EU Council when these issues are on the agenda, even if they would have mere observer status on all matters of the internal market or the common currency.
<P>
The idea for such immediate "partial membership" is not new.
When Ruolf Seiters, foreign policy spokesman of Germany’s Christian Democrats, proposed it almost two years ago, all the EU candidates rejected it as "second-class membership", fearing it would keep them out of the inner circle.
They should now reconsider.
It is better to have a foot in the door than to be waiting outside.
Moreover, being at least partly part of the club will bring ultimate full membership into closer reach.
<P>
Pushing forward with enlargement in both Nato and the EU would help to turn vague perspectives into promises being kept.
It would help to stabilize democratic Europe during the many years it will take Russia to gain stability for itself.
And as such it will help, not hinder Russia to progress on the difficult road ahead.
