<HEADLINE>
Farewell Middle Class Subsidies
<P>
CAMBRIDGE: The revolution underway in the world economy creates unprecedented competition and innovation, which benefits consumers.
It also means that today’s status quo -- big government, the nation and welfare state, comfortable middle class subsidies -- is probably doomed.
<P>
Clearly, the 19th century belief that free trade and free markets create ever-expanding opportunities has been resurrected.
It is instructive, however, to ask why that faith was lost, and later recovered, in this century.
The answers may tell us how long today’s new world will last.
<P>
The rise of the nation state and the rise of government as economic actor shattered the old liberal world.
The Great Wars and Great Depression induced deep disillusion about internationalism.
Wartime introduction of income taxes and large public debt was followed by revolution, protectionism, hyperinflation, and competitive devaluations.
Governments marched to the center of economic life.
<P>
At WWII’s close the beggar-thy-neighbor policies of the interwar years stood exposed as a cause of war.
The liberal world order thus began a comeback.
Reopening international commerce (see table) expanded trade faster than in the 19th century.
In 35 years, Germany’s trade increased tenfold; Japan’s trade almost twenty times.
With rare protectionist exceptions, liberalization of trade is recognized around the world as a boon.
<P>
The overriding reasons for attacks on the state, the other side of liberalism’s return, are financial: in the past 30 years governments borrowed big-time to parcel out the gains of economic growth.
Subsidies became pervasive; unemployment was treated with handouts; there was money for states to do everything – or so it seemed.
<P>
The share of the labor force working for government, outside the US and Japan, ballooned.
This was most dramatic in Scandinavia, where (before the crisis of the past few years) a third of the labor force was working for government!
In Sweden, indeed, all net new jobs were in the government sector.
But today state debts are large and future debts -- say, pension liabilities -- even bigger.
Government must shrink or go bust.
<P>
The State is also under attack in the labor market.
In Europe, labor markets are fossilized.
Under union pressure, flexibility and competition gave way to a high cost/highly restrictive employment system.
Inevitably, high unemployment results, but it is softened as governments subsidize the unemployed.
Riddled by debt, governments can no longer defend these restrictions and so labor markets are coming into the range of radical reform.
Does liberalization work?
The US example, the only full employment economy in the world, demonstrates that it can.
<P>
The welfare state is also being undermined.
In America, time on welfare is now limited and people who have not worked for years suddenly must do so.
In Europe, however, unemployment remains a "good" job.
Replacement of earnings via unemployment compensation (after tax adjustments) hits 70% and up.
Even after 60 months of unemployment, a couple with 2 children can get more than 60% of their earnings replaced.
Throw in earnings from the informal labor market and you make a good living.
By comparison, in America long term unemployment does not pay: state plans replace only 17% of earnings.
<P>
So work incentives are being rejigged.
Britain requires unemployment claimants to show up and actually consider job opportunities.
Result?
Unemployment has fallen to record low levels.
In Germany and France the attack on the welfare state is tardy: the German government is weak; French socialists promise to create more government jobs.
Such nostalgic policies cannot last.
Soon the rigors of global finance will force these countries onto the same track as everyone else because public sector deficits cannot cover the bill for large numbers of people who won’t work.
<P>
Big government is also under attack in the area of public sector enterprise.
From telecommunications to railroads, electricity to airlines the old idea that government control the "commanding heights of the economy" looks silly: international competition and the absence of barriers to entry do far more for the viability of a firm than government ownership.
<P>
Although privatization is practiced from Moscow to Havana it remains controversial.
France’s socialist government, for example, knows that privatization means increased productivity but also dramatic job cuts.
It resists but really can’t hold out because its international competitors understand that productivity gains of 30% or more can be harvested from privatization.
These gains remain politically controversial, but so are higher debts and taxes.
This is why, whether reluctantly or enthusiastically, public enterprises are for sale, even if unions strike.
<P>
Are such attacks viable?
Everyday the private market demonstrates that it can finance any scale of operation and design and innovate in ways governments can’t.
Malaysia used to get points for spearheading an industrial upgrading and Vice President Gore for talking about government’s role in building the internet.
But don’t worry, government involvement in production is practically extinct.
In economic terms, the return of the nation state is also not in the cards.
Effective firms play worldwide in their sourcing, production and sales.
They seek market access and deregulation not defensible territory.
<P>
Still, backsliding is possible because of politics.
Take encouragement from Tony Blair’s message last year to European socialists — change or count your days, but also recognize that competition, privatization and globalization dramatically impact the earnings of unskilled people.
In the US, the shift has already happened; in Europe it is being fought.
Low paid jobs, which is where low skilled labor goes, are plentiful in the US and are concentrated in trade and services.
The choice is clear: governments can keep people on the dole without hope, or allow the unskilled to climb the first rung of the economic ladder through work in low paid jobs.
<P>
Europe and Japan failed to use the recent global economic prosperity to reform.
Liberalizing labor markets, cutting pervasive red-tape and subsidies would have produced more taxpayers and fewer hangers-on.
It would have revitalized Europe’s economies, solving fiscal problems.
Improved finances might, in time, improve the investment climate so that the increased insecurity of voters is eased by a growing economy and more jobs.
<P>
Fortunately, a "last" chance exists.
EMU’s coming will not deliver stunning economic benefits, but nevertheless offers the vision of a new, dynamic Europe.
If the next German government seizes that opportunity, rather than aping Premier Jospin’s denial of reality, a start will be made.
The point is to allow people to fend for themselves by widening opportunities and increasing individual responsibility.
