<HEADLINE>
Fighting Corruption in the Post Communist World
<P>
CAMBRIDGE: In the last few years, corruption in the former socialist countries has been growing rapidly.
In many countries, businesses, small and large, domestic and foreign, pay bribes to officials.
The growth of corruption has alarmed policy makers and business people from the Baltics to Bishkek.
Some critics even charge that increased corruption exposes the failure of economic reforms, particularly privatization.
If only reforms were slower, corruption would not have grown as much.
<P>
The critics are right that with slower reforms there would be less corruption.
But there would be much less private business as well.
Take the case of Russia, corruption is growing precisely because private business is growing.
Shop keepers indeed have to pay local officials.
Trading firms need to bribe customs bureaucrats.
Foreign investors must bribe regulators to start joint ventures.
But the fact that all these payoffs are made means that shops are opening, imports are coming , and joint ventures are starting at an unprecedented pace.
If none of this were happening, there would be much less corruption, but we would not call reforms a success.
<P>
Actually, the rise of corruption shows that reforms have been too slow, since governments continue to have massive power over business.
There would be much less corruption if say, local government officials did not have the right to approve the opening of shops, if customs officials could not keep imports at the border for months, and if joints ventures did not require numerous approvals.
Bribes are merely payments for the bureaucrats' signatures.
As long as too many signatures are required, corruption will be rampant.
And since payments for signatures are expensive, corruption is a high cost of doing business.
<P>
How can this cost be reduced?
One approach is to fight corruption with police and courts.
This can never work because police and courts are themselves easily corruptible, as are the politicians who oversee them.
Another approach is to reform the bureaucracy and make it an honest and competent civil service.
But even in France, where the best and the brightest become bureaucrats, the civil servants are continuously caught taking bribes.
In places with a more normal civil service, including most of Europe, Asia, Latin America and Africa, bribing bureaucrats is a way of life.
Since the post communist bureaucracies are probably not better than average, reforming them will take decades.
Instead, it is smarter to deal with the fundamental problem, namely that too many signatures are needed to do business.
If you cannot catch bureaucrats taking bribes, and if you cannot make them honest, take away the power they abuse.
<P>
The best antidote to bureaucratic powers is free market policies.
Trade liberalization will undermine the power of trade and customs officials.
Privatization of urban real estate will save the businesses from the constant demand for payoffs by local officials, who as landlords can extract bribes by threatening to repossess the premises.
Free securities markets will enable firms to raise private capital, and will destroy the lever that bureaucrats have over firms because they allocate credits.
Liberalization of foreign capital inflows will end the bureaucratic stickup of foreign investors.
These reform strategies will undermine the bureaucratic power and reduce corruption.
More important, by making business cheaper to do, they will spur growth in the region.
<P>
This approach has already worked in the Russian privatization.
After less than two years of the program, almost 20,000 medium and large firms have been privatized, two thirds of the industrial workers are employed in the private sector, and over 40 million Russian people have become shareholders.
The privatized firms are making new products, exporting their output, laying off workers and finding foreign investors.
They are doing this because their managers and shareholders, and not the ministers, are making decisions.
The ministers have lost almost all their control over privatized firms, which means that firms can turn to making money without being hobbled by, or bribing, the ministers.
Because privatization reduced bureaucratic control over firms, these firms have started restructuring.
Similar stories can be cited for Poland, Slovenia, the Czech Republic, and Moldova or Kyrgizstan.
<P>
It is none too soon to accelerate reforms, since the bureaucrats are busying expanding their power and incomes.
New bureaucracies are being set up to regulate private business.
When the new anti-monopoly committee was first established in Russia, it began its life by making a list of potential monopolies it wanted to regulate, which included Russia's largest industrial enterprises, but also many bakeries, shops and bathhouses that it claimed were local monopolies.
Soon afterwards, firms began to pay anti-monopoly officials just to get off the list.
The lesson here is to fight corruption, market reforms must move faster than the bureaucrats.
<P>
But are these reforms even feasible?
Bureaucrats are sure to fight them tooth and nail, and will have allies at the top levels of government.
Again, the experience of privatization in Russia shows how to fight the bureaucracy.
To get market reforms through, privatization built coalitions against the bureaucracy.
These coalitions included workers, managers, and the public.
Privatization has also created a powerful new constituency for further liberalization, including businessmen, brokers, managers of privatized firms, and not least of all the 40 million new shareholders.
These groups have shown their powers when, following the crash of the MMM pyramid, the Ministry of Finance proposed to regulate the Russian securities market through the notoriously corrupt Tax Inspectorate.
Brokers, investors and other stock market participants, most of whom had nothing to do with MMM, organized a powerful opposition to this attempt by the Finance Ministry to grab power, and the proposal was shelved.
Similarly, in trade reform, capital markets reform, land reform, market participants are pushing for less regulation.
It will be the markets, then, and not the politicians, that will ultimately defeat corruption in Russia and the rest of Eastern Europe.
