<HEADLINE>
For a Bigger, Better Union
<P>
NEW YORK: Ten years after the Berlin Wall’s fall, the European Union may at last be redeeming its promised invitations of membership for former communist states.
Romano Prodi’s European Commission has conceived a far-sighted strategy of enlargement.
Its features are greater openness and flexibility in negotiations, and clearer incentives for aspiring members to move closer to the political, economic, and institutional standards of the EU.
If these work, the Union will become the world’s biggest example of successful, free market democracy.
<P>
Expanding the EU is no small task.
Adopting the ways of potential newcomers to those of the EU takes time; negotiating terms of entry can be fiendishly complex; and the EU itself must reform its institutions for a future Union with perhaps 30 members.
<P>
Delve deep and the EU’s collective altruism towards the East has often masked the pursuit of national advantage.
In a Union divided between net contributors and net beneficiaries, the economic fact of enlargement is that it will bring in much poorer countries.
Either present givers provide a bigger pie, or present takers become satisfied with smaller slices.
Because each accession treaty must be agreed unanimously, the potential for deadlock is obvious.
Spaniards and Irishmen mutter that they will not let their people lose out to Poles or Hungarians or Lats.
<P>
So until now, at least on paper, the EU refused to open enlargement talks with candidate countries before they fulfilled a set of burdensome criteria.
Although one could quibble whether the countries with which negotiations were opened in 1998 (Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Poland, and Slovenia) had really jumped these hurdles, the threshold was set high.
Consequently, the prospect of entry into the Union provided little incentive to countries for which meeting the stiff criteria was not yet on the cards.
But lack of progress in such countries threatens to make Europe a continent divided: half a fortress of the rich, the other a volatile cauldron of the poor.
The shock of ethnic wars contributed to the idea of using enlargement as a carrot to entice stragglers toward reform.
<P>
Prodi’s Commission now proposes to negotiate with any country that meets the political criteria (stable democracy and respect for human/minority rights) and not insist on the satisfaction of difficult economic criteria (a functioning market economy and readiness to withstand EU competition) as a prerequisite for negotiations.
As a result, the Commission suggests that negotiations start with six additional countries: Bulgaria, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Romania, and Slovakia.
A prospect of future negotiations is also held out to other Balkan countries, provided they settle border disputes, respect minority rights, and join in regional cooperation.
<P>
Having relaxed the opening criteria, the Commission also proposes making negotiations more flexible.
Previously, once negotiations opened, all prospective entrants were kept more or less on the same track as the Union went through a set list of areas (referred to as “chapters” in the Brussels patois) to be negotiated with each candidate.
Now the Commission wants to open new areas of negotiation with any candidate country whenever it seems ready.
<P>
This new flexibility provides an incentive to reform as fast as possible, and the Commission explicitly contemplates a competition of sorts: some countries may be able to catch and leapfrog the early leaders, who may be delayed if they slacken their efforts.
One drawback here is that cooperation among candidates may be discouraged by the race to join.
This could be remedied by injecting incentives for cooperation into the ways the EU provides assistance.
<P>
These inducements can be made more attractive by the prospect, held out by the Commission, that some countries may join as early as 2003.
Although early admissions are not assured, such a date puts pressure on today’s members to complete the internal reform of EU institutions.
These were created for the six founding countries and, through insistence on unanimity on most matters, are increasingly burdensome.
Before new members are admitted, more decisions will have to made by majority rule, otherwise enlargement will explode existing EU programs.
With 12 candidates knocking at the door and others on the horizon, today’s members cannot tarry.
<P>
Two issues not yet adequately addressed by the Commission, or the EU more generally, remain.
<P>
First, postcommunist societies, and not just governments, must become engaged in the accession process.
Today almost all EU assistance given through the Phare program goes through candidate governments or through counter-parties residing in the EU.
This invites corruption and inefficiency.
New Phare guidelines offer no remedy.
But truly open societies demand active civic institutions and private sectors independent of government; so societies, even more than states, must become qualified.
Phare programs ought to encourage this by being more competitive, opened to all who qualify, and, whenever possible, regional in scope.
<P>
Second, although European security could be enhanced by enlargement, the most worrying countries remain far from qualifying for membership.
This is particularly true of the Western Balkans, but also of countries east and south of the Union.
Holding out prospects for eventual membership is important, but the EU must take decisive steps if admission is to become more than a mirage.
<P>
The Commission recognizes the need for an interim policy, but its proposals remain vague.
Europe cannot go on reacting to crises as they occur along its frontiers; it must take a pro-active, preventive approach.
The Stability Pact for Southeastern Europe is a first step, but it is little more than an empty framework with three amorphous working tables for discussion.
The Union must put something real on the table.
That something should be access to the European single market and aid in establishing the rule of law and building efficient administrations.
Such a policy would attract private capital, foster economic growth, and help countries qualify for accession.
<P>
For the Balkan crisis is by no means over.
Isolated, Milosevic hunkers down in power in Belgrade; Kosovo is not pacified; tension mounts in Montenegro.
Only by building democratic, open societies in which borders and governments diminish in importance can the circle of violence be broken.
Bringing this about will require actions that go beyond the competence of the Commissioner for Enlargement.
It needs to be spelled out by the President of the Commission and endorsed by the European Council at December’s Helsinki summit.
The people of Central and Eastern Europe have waited long enough.
