<HEADLINE>
France and America: Echoes of de Gaulle?
<P>
PARIS: Little more than a year ago, Bill Clinton and Jacques Chirac were effusive in complimenting each other on their initiatives to stop the Bosnian war.
In December, 1995, French foreign minister Hervé de Charette announced a "reorientation" of relations with NATO, from which France under General Charles de Gaulle had, for all practical purposes, withdrawn 30 years before.
France again took its seat at meetings of NATO defense ministers, without, to be sure, suggesting reintegration of French forces into NATO's supreme command.
France also agreed -- in principle -- with other NATO members on the creation of multinational forces, such as the one organized to separate the warring parties in Bosnia, and on the idea of a "European defense identity," implying reactivation of the European Defense Union, created in 1955 but dormant since.
Finally, France participated actively in talks on NATO's eastward enlargement, and on creating a partnership with Russia and Ukraine.
<P>
Today, it appears, there is nothing left of Franco-American goodwill.
Relations between the two allies have entered one of those periods of tension which have flared many times since World War II's close.
The United States vetoed reelection, advocated by France, of UN Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, arguing that it wanted to "enlarge the role" of the general secretary in reforming the world body.
(On both sides this spat was rather paradoxical, if one remembers that de Gaulle wanted to diminish as much as possible the powers of the UN, to which he contemptuously referred to as a "thingamajig", and that America owes over a billion dollars in past due contributions to the UN.)
<P>
At the same time, Washington doesn't even want to hear any talk about conferring on a European, as France demands, command of the allied fleet in the Mediterranean.
Who, indeed, can imagine America's Senate agreeing that a foreigner might hold in his hands the fate of the prestigious 6th Fleet, the most powerful naval armada in the world?
Also simultaneously, the United States has made it clear that no one will be able, in Africa or elsewhere, to follow a policy that excludes the United States.
Yet America demands that it should be left alone to put back on track the delicate Israeli-Palestinian peace process, in jeopardy since the assassination of Yitzak Rabin and the Israeli right's return to power in Jerusalem.
<P>
Here is a budding feud that was exaggerated by the media.
General de Gaulle is no longer here, and no real rupture between Paris and Washington is on the horizon, even if on some issues -- Rwanda and Zaire, for example -- the views of the two governments are at opposite poles.
But recent tiffs point to fundamental differences with respect to how both countries view NATO.
General de Gaulle and his successors have never given up the idea of conducting a foreign policy independent of America.
They have always viewed European unity as a means to such a policy, to the extent that, union being strength, it can serve to reduce the disequilibrium of power between the United States and its allies across the Atlantic.
<P>
For four decades, the existence of the Soviet Union, from which France was protected by the German buffer zone, gave French presidents a certain freedom of action vis ŕ vis the United States, all the while it being clear that whenever a major crisis occurred -- in Berlin, Cuba, or the Gulf War -- no one was as strong in their support of the Americans as the French.
Perhaps one day Russia will become a threat again, but for the moment it is more threatened by its own internal disintegration.
Perhaps China will one day be tempted to renew its dream of an empire which, throughout the ages, has never ceased to haunt the great powers.
But the fact remains that, for the moment, America is the only superpower, thus limiting France's freedom to act in the world independently.
<P>
The isolationism that characterized America's 1994 congressional elections is forgotten.
American power, its foreign trade, rises in the price of oil, and the industrialization of China and Latin America, make it impossible for America to lose interest in the rest of the planet.
Indeed, the Congress makes no bones about legislating against countries guilty of trading with Iran, Iraq, or Cuba.
Bill Clinton, elected in 1992 against George Bush (whom Clinton accused of being solely interested in foreign policy) is tending more and more to become personally involved in foreign affairs, a habit of all second term US presidents, with one eye cast on the history books.
<P>
In this Clinton is encouraged by a Europe shown incapable of solving by itself the Bosnian tragedy.
But this cheerleading is not the case where Europe's economic interests are at stake: it is enough to look at the EU's refusal to join the embargo against Cuba, the strength of Germany's reaction to the merger of America's two airplane manufacturers Boeing and McDonnell-Douglas, or the determination with which the EU fifteen are pushing forward with monetary union.
The importance of unemployment on the old continent, as against an America which created six million new jobs in the last four years, is sufficient to explain this independent attitude.
<P>
What remains to be seen is what will be the value of the EU's new currency, the euro, against the dollar.
Will the single currency turn out to be an instrument of independence or of renewed alignment?
Will America view the euro's establishment as an aid or a threat to the dollar?
These questions are certainly much more important than those that contributed to the outbreak of the idea of renewed Franco-American crisis.
The answers to them will go a long way toward determining not only long-term relations between Washington and Paris, but between America and all of Europe.
