<HEADLINE>
Gorbachev's Living Ghost
<P>
PRINCETON: So, Mikhail Gorbachev has filmed a television commercial for Pizza Hut.
Nowadays, politicians everywhere seem to want to "cash in" once their days in power are finished.
Even more revealing than Gorbachev’s presence in this commercial, however, is the notion that the advertisements will not be shown in Russia.
Yesterday’s leader of the vanished Soviet Union, it seems, is an unwelcome ghost in today’s Russia.
<P>
When Nikita Khrushchev was forced from power in 1964, his companions were no longer politicians and statesmen but us, his family, surrounding him at his secluded dacha.
He was shoved off the world stage against his will, arbitrarily and unjustifiably, or so his remaining supporters and relatives believed.
But there is no question that Khrushchev had an easier time of it in his retirement than has his successor in reform, Mikhail Gorbachev.
<P>
In becoming an unknown, Khrushchev had no choice.
Forced into anonymity, he was also (mercifully) beyond public reach.
Gorbachev, on the other hand, is all too vulnerable to charges hurled from every direction: for beginning perestroika or for beginning it in the wrong way; for being too radical, too conservative, or too feeble.
By starting his "destructive" reforms, by declaring the age of glasnost, he exposed himself to unending criticism.
<P>
It is now over ten years since Gorbachev rose to power as General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, putting in motion changes that led to the end of the party and the union, but not (it seems) to Gorbachev the man.
After his fall, he did not flee public scrutiny, but continued to embrace it as director of the Gorbachev-Fund, and as a, perhaps quixotic, candidate for president of Russia last year.
<P>
Perhaps if he had died in 1991, people would now busy themselves assessing Gorbachev’s place in history.
Faced with the living, breathing Gorbachev, however, there is awkward silence.
When he is spoken about at all, it is usually to deny him his achievements.
Ironically, Gorbachev is partly to blame for such ungratefulness.
Reformers often lack patience, and his plan for sweeping economic changes in just 500 days was as utopian as Khrushchev's promise of "Developed Communism" in 20 years.
<P>
Unlike other Russian leaders, Gorbachev accepts responsibility for the negative consequences of his rule.
Locked away in comfortable "confinement," Khrushchev privately berated himself for all he failed to accomplish.
Gorbachev has gone Khrushchev one better: by joining historians, politicians, his own comrades and the general public in reviewing his rule, he helped bury himself as a historical figure while still alive.
For the inescapable conclusion, it seems, is that his reforms all went astray or failed because of the bad choices which Gorbachev made ten years ago.
<P>
As a man with a conscience, having reflected upon his leadership from outside the Kremlin, Gorbachev is eager to fix those calamities for which he feels responsible.
Right or wrong, Gorbachev is that rare politician who admits his culpability for every drop of blood shed in Russia during his years in power.
Although his position was weak (on a good day he ranked in the low 90s on a list of Russia’s top 100 politicians, while on a bad day he was absent from the polls altogether), his candidacy in the 1996 presidential elections made casting a ballot worthwhile for at least some Russians.
<P>
It would have been too bad had such an exciting event, (after all, Russia remains new to the business of electing presidents, and novelty imparts a festive air to our elections), become just another occasion to register dissatisfaction.
The chance to really "give a vote" made going to the polls worthwhile.
Gorbachev’s presence on the ballot meant that there was at least one lever to pull that was not purely cynical.
The possibility of a positive choice, instead of mere rejection, created for some of us an unusually encouraging feeling.
<P>
I never believed that Gorbachev, if elected, would be a good president, or even that he held a serious chance of winning.
But he is the first president in Russian/Soviet history who succeeded in re-emerging as a candidate after years of ceaseless efforts to bury him and his reputation.
In campaigning, he was able to speak as both a leader from the past and a voice for the future.
<P>
"To be heard"-- that is something of which the retired Khrushchev could only dream.
Before his death, with ample time to contemplate the past, my grandfather concluded that his greatest achievement was not his denunciation of Stalin's crimes but, in fact, his own dismissal from the Kremlin leadership by means of a simple vote.
He was neither declared an "enemy of the people," nor sent to the gulag, but simply forced into "a rest of merit" at his dacha.
In the 1960s Khrushchev's political death didn't become a physical one, as it certainly would have been in the 1930s.
Nevertheless, Khrushchev regretted his lack of courage and wished he had used his time to push his "thaw" ahead, so that even political death would be optional.
<P>
Twenty five years later, Russian history has made that liberal turn.
Death and disappearance are no longer the only options.
Political death is now a matter of choice.
If Gorbachev did not have a chance to win last year's elections, he at least had the chance to run in them.
Perestroika and glasnost, so derided nowadays, prepared the ground for that.
<P>
So before chuckling at the spectre of Gorbachev embracing commercial culture in those Pizza Hut ads, and wishing that he quietly disappear, we would do well to remember that it was Gorbachev who introduced today's emerging liberal political culture to Russia.
His continuing presence on the scene is not at all ghostly, but instead a testimony to how well he succeeded.
