<HEADLINE>
Hong Kong And China: Cohabiting Already
<P>
BEIJING: "One China, two systems": so said Deng Xiaoping as China and Britain debated the return to Chinese control of the crown colony.
In a few months time, Deng’s catchy phrase will be put to the test.
What difference will reintegration of Hong Kong within China mean for both economies?
To answer this question, let us examine some key statistics.
<P>
Since economic reform began in the late 1970s, about 60% of China's foreign trade has been conducted through Hong Kong and 75% of China's international financing raised through Hong Kong.
Indeed, in the commercial banking sector, 41% of Hong Kong dollar claims on banks outside Hong Kong are to banks located on the Chinese mainland.
While Hong Kong remains the largest investor in the mainland and reallocated 90% of its labor-intensive manufacturing to factories in China, the mainland is the second largest "foreign" investor in Hong Kong.
By June 1995, mainland China had invested more than $25 billion in Hong Kong, which represents about 80% of China's total overseas investment.
<P>
By the end of 1995, China had officially established about 1,800 companies, with total assets over $42.5 billion, in Hong Kong.
So today mainland companies handle about 25% of Hong Kong's foreign trade and own a large portfolio of Hong Kong's commercial buildings.
These companies take in 25% of Hong Kong dollar bank deposits and 21% of insurance fees, and control the largest shipping business in the territory.
While mainland China has its comparative advantage of lower-cost labor, Hong Kong, as one of the largest free ports and financial centers in the world, registered in 1996 the world highest proportion -- 81% -- of GDP derived from services.
The two economies are highly complementary, not competitive, and transactions between the two are already a matter of daily routine.
<P>
Such statistics indicate that Hong Kong and mainland China have been linked to each other closely in economic areas, and that the handover of sovereignty may not have much immediate impact on both sides.
Nevertheless, fears remain.
<P>
One questions that is often raised, of course, concerns the possible withdrawal of investment from Hong Kong after the handover, although the Hong Kong stock market has been rising in the past year.
"Withdrawal" of the sort pessimists predict, indeed, actually happened already in the late 80s after the Chinese and British governments signed their joint declaration announcing the handover.
But it was not very long before capital that had fled began to come back; with this investment came some of the investors who had left, Hong Kong residents who became foreign passport holders.
Most of them suffered financial losses from their capital withdrawal and not many have fully recovered even now.
This implies that much, if not most, of the political uncertainty with potentially negative impact on economic prosperity has already been factored in during the previous period and is now a "built-in" element in the Hong Kong economy.
<P>
Why did investors leave only to return?
The No. 1 reason is that China's high growth creates big profits for Hong Kong investors.
In this sense, sustaining economic growth in mainland China is the best insurance for the economic and financial stability of Hong Kong: the prosperity on the mainland provides better business opportunities for the people of Hong Kong than anywhere else.
With the expectation that there will be no "succession crisis" and that an orderly transfer of power had long been agreed, business people simply do not expect the political situation in China to be worse than in 1989, when good business opportunities continued to abound.
Moreover, Hong Kong’s businessmen are known for their business orientation.
Many of them were much less fazed by the killings in Tiananmen Square in June 1989 than were people in the West.
After all, many had seen similar events throughout Southeast Asia over the past decades -- and seen themselves prosper.
<P>
In the medium-run, one key aspect of the relationship between the two economies seems certain to change.
A pronounced increase in investment by mainland companies in Hong Kong is extremely likely.
This is a double-edged sword.
More investment in Hong Kong will help to keep the island economy humming.
On the other hand, however, Chinese companies in general are newcomers to the market economy and remain in many ways strangers to the rules and norms of international business.
As they crowd into Hong Kong over a short period of time, their presence may cause some difficulties for Hong Kong’s highly respected civil servants who try to maintain the high standards of Hong Kong’s market environment, with its impartial enforcement of the laws and fair competition.
From this point of view, it might be best that not much rapid changes take place after the handover and that business integration proceeds with caution.
<P>
About the long-run, however, at the moment there should be much less worry.
From the start of discussions with Britain over Hong Kong’s future it was asserted that the "one country, two systems" formula would not be changed for "50 years".
The specific figure of 50 years was used to avoid the ambiguity contained in the phrase "long-run," which was used in the earlier discussions over Hong Kong’s sovereignty.
Deng’s formulation really meant that the arrangement is designed to be kept for at least two generations.
And given both China and Hong Kong’s capacity to completely reinvent themselves within one generation, no one can possibly guess where the two societies may be in two generations time.
Hong Kong’s "tiger" and China’s giant panda have already gone a long way toward a tame coexistence.
