<HEADLINE>
In Defense of Defense
<P>
PRAGUE - One feature that makes a human being human is awareness of his or her own dignity.
This awareness may naturally take many forms in people of different character, social circumstance, cultures or civilizations, or different periods of time.
I am, however, deeply convinced that no human being fails to understand the meaning of humiliation, insult, rape or enslavement.
All people recognize an attack on human dignity, which is actually an attack on the essence of humanity.
<P>
It is true that we may be, for valid reasons, troubled or irritated by a thousand and one things that have accompanied the dramatic reconstruction of democracy, market economies and civil society in Central Europe.
But no person of sound judgement can deny that the restoration of liberties, which until recently were suppressed or limited, allows our citizens at last to live in dignity.
Leading a worthy life no longer demands the sacrifice it once did, and people are thus better equipped to be true to themselves in this important dimension of their existence.
<P>
True to themselves; but what about others, and what about the wider community, the nation at large?
Should citizens love their state, why they should feel attached to it, what kind of attachment should this be, why, indeed, should people make sacrifices for the sake of independent statehood?
It is time, I believe, for people in this region to perceive the state as a tool for the defense of their homes, and thus of a part of themselves.
<P>
Readiness to defend the state is a specific manifestation of a human being's sense of personal dignity.
If we rebel against humiliation, insult or enslavement as individuals; if we defend our individual human dignity and resist attacks that threaten it; we do -- indeed we must do -- precisely the same as a community that has established a state, because the state is, among other things, an instrument to protect our life together in freedom.
In other words: readiness to defend a democratic state and its values against violence, aggression and evil should be nothing less than a natural extension of the inherent will of each individual to defend one's own dignity against potential threats.
It is simply a way of implementing this will -- in those cases where this cannot be done in any other way -- through joint organized action in pursuit of a common interest.
<P>
It would be a fatal error to believe that since we spend money on armed forces to this end, national defense is solely a military affair to which the rest of the population need not pay attention.
Preparation of effective defense of the state is unthinkable without a greater or lesser degree of participation of all the state's institutions.
In a democratic state these engage in the defense effort only insofar as society understands the importance of defense in the first place.
It is thus necessary to remind ourselves time and again that defending the state means first and foremost defending the human dignity of every one of us.
<P>
The new republics of the region, face no concrete or visible enemy at present.
As a result, many consider defense expenditures a luxury, if not an outright waste of money.
This view is thoroughly erroneous, and must be challenged in every possible way.
Modern European history gives us ample evidence that wars and suffering are most likely when democracies underestimate self-defense in peacetime, or fail to summon enough readiness to defend themselves before it is too late.
<P>
It is precisely now, when no immediate threat looms, that defense must be contemplated.
It is now, with the first chance ever to build broad structures designed to defend the democratic world that people must demonstrate a serious commitment to defense effort.
It is now, when a new political and security order for the European continent is beginning to emerge, that we must clearly show our readiness to take our share of responsibility for peace and for the defense of human dignity with all the values that safeguard it.
<P>
It is my belief that the Czech army will never again be confronted by an adversary threatening war, and that its future assignments will not go beyond participation in international peace-enforcement operations.
But even if an army were not needed, its importance would still remain unchanged.
An army will always remain an unequivocal expression of the shared will to live in freedom, to defend freedom and to engage in joint efforts in order to ensure freedom for others as well.
Furthermore, the army will always remain a school of discipline, loyalty to the country, coexistence, and solidarity, and thus also a school of civic virtue, including civic pride and self-confidence.
<P>
Building confidence in the state means reinforcing that which safeguards a worthy, free, safe and happy life for us all as a community, and thus also as individuals.
If we want to be a community of people who enjoy living together in a shared home, who love that home and who govern the state democratically, we all must understand the meaning of the sacrifices that we make, or are prepared to make, to ensure the defense of our new states.
