<HEADLINE>
Iran's Election Surprise
<P>
WASHINGTON D.C.: Iran’s revolution is poised to enter a new phase when, later this summer, former minister of culture Mohammed Khatami (who won a stunning upset on May 23 over the heavily favored speaker of parliament) becomes the country’s fifth president.
But don’t look for Tehran’s Islamic government to change overnight.
Khatami is a Shi’ite mullah whose father was an ayatollah.
Moreover, Khatami wears the black turban that signifies his family’s descent from the prophet Mohammed, and served in both the parliament and cabinet until forced from power in 1992.
<P>
The various branches of Iran’s complex government -- which is headed by supreme religious leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, who all but announced that he was voting for the parliament’s Ali Akbar Nateq-Nouri -- will find it hard to ignore the excitement generated by Khatami in the most contested presidential poll ever.
Voter turnout, indeed, was the biggest since the 1979 revolution against the Shah.
At his final rally in the 12-day campaign, Khatami’s words encapsulated public anger and frustration: "Our people do not deserve to be poor and ignorant.
Our backwardness is not due to natural resources or culture as we have both.
The problem is due to the lack of a correct, independent government."
<P>
At home and abroad, the expectation is that Khatami’s presidency will be marked by a "kinder, gentler" version of Islamic rule.
Khatami’s past inspires such hopes.
Until forced from office in 1992 for being permissive, Khatami’s stint in government was marked by the approval of plays in Tehran’s theatre by Chekov and Arthur Miller, the proliferation of livelier literature, including satire, reintroduction of chess (banned because its pieces include a king) and the production of movies with sensitive love and anti-war themes that won foreign film awards.
Khatami’s aides now mention such reforms as: legalizing political parties, including opposition groups prepared to work within the system; reigning in the swaggering paramilitary groups and morality police who patrol neighborhoods; loosening restrictions on the media.
<P>
Promises of this sort attracted three key sectors of society (who rarely or never voted before) to support Khatami’s election: young people, women, and the middle class.
In a country where almost half the population is under 18, and where eligibility to begins at 15, many youths expect a wider and freer range of books, movies, and magazines as well as moves to restore satellite dishes, outlawed in the mid-90s by parliament because they featured foreign news, American soap operas, and western music videos.
To attract the young, Khatami was the first Iranian candidate to use the Internet (his address:http://www.Khatami.com), which also made him accessible to the vast Iranian community abroad.
<P>
Women voters expect the introduction -- over time -- of more flexible options in Islamic dress codes, less harassment when they are in public, and greater professional and social opportunities.
(Bringing hope here is the fact that Khatami’s own daughter is a university student.)
And the middle class anticipates tolerance of what Khatami calls "different views" as well as economic moves to reverse a decline so severe that per capita income in real terms is only one quarter of what it was under the Shah.
Second jobs have long been commonplace and third jobs are now becoming a necessity for many.
<P>
The key to Iran’s new era, however, lies more in the new internal balance of power among Tehran’s political factions than to electoral mandates.
During his two terms in office, current president Hashemi Rafsanjani was increasingly frustrated and, in the end, spurned by others in power.
Dynamic attempts at political and economic liberalization, including reviving the stock exchange launched by the Shah, were slowed or scuttled by political hardliners, social conservatives, and Ayatollah Khamenei.
Expectations that Rafsanjani’s administration would return Iran to normalcy at home and abroad came to naught.
<P>
Over the next four years, Khatami and Rafsanjani could craft a powerful alliance.
Rafsanjani, who has always been a major power in whatever position he held, is scheduled to become head of a revitalized Expediency Council, a small group that reviews legislation, mediates between the executive and legislative branches, and advises the supreme ruler.
<P>
Yet Khatami’s decisive victory does not translate into total freedom of movement.
The Islamic republic does have a veneer of democracy and a wide variety of opinions even among the ruling mullahs.
Like his predecessor, Khatami faces a conservative parliament that balks at significant change, no matter what voters mandate.
That parliament will also be headed by the man Khatami defeated, Nateq-Nouri, who may continue the rivalry until a second presidential showdown in 2001.
Moreover, in Iran’s system last word is vested not in the president, but with Ayatollah Khamenei.
<P>
In contrast to domestic issues, foreign policy is unlikely to witness real change anytime soon.
Unlike Nateq-Nouri, who was an anti-Western ideologue with limited exposure to the outside world, Khatami speaks at least two foreign languages, studied in Europe, and worked at a mosque in Germany.
He supports exposure to multiple cultures.
<P>
But Khatami indicates that he will not deviate from the regime’s longtime positions, so don’t look for improved relations with America.
Indeed, foreign policy was not an issue of contention among the four presidential candidates.
Under virtually any government -- monarchy or mullah -- Iran will seek to play a dominant role in the Persian Gulf to the west and economic influence among the former Soviet republics of Central Asia to the north.
These are uncharted waters for Khatami, whose focus has been internal and intellectual.
(Between 1992 and 1997 he ran the country’s national library.)
In terms of style and tenor, Khatami’s presidency will almost certainly be less strident than any of the alternative candidates who were allowed to run.
