<HEADLINE>
Iran and America: Wrestling with Old Hates
<P>
WASHINGTON, D.C. Iranian/American relations, after a generation of hostility, are beginning to thaw.
The moves underway are gradual, ranging from regional security to sports, but could result in full rapprochement.
Such a reconciliation may, indeed, prevent one of today’s fashionable academic ideas, that of a “clash of civilizations” between the Christian and Moslem worlds, from ever taking place.
Iran’s initiatives to America, indeed, indicate that it wants to be part of today’s globalization, not isolated within a brooding Islamic bloc.
<P>
Iran formally launched its opening toward America in January.
During an interview intended as a direct address to the American people, President Mohammed Khatami, a reformer elected last year, proposed cultural exchanges as a way to “crack the wall of mistrust.”
“What we seek,” he continued, “is what the founders of American civilization were also pursuing four centuries ago.
This is why we sense an intellectual affinity with the essence of American civilization.”
The US quickly responded.
President Clinton said that America “regretted estrangement” between the two peoples and said that “real differences” were no longer “insurmountable.”
<P>
The pace of this tentative rapprochement has picked up since, both publicly and behind the scenes.
A February a trip by American wrestlers Tehran broke the ice.
In a country where “Down With the USA” remains plastered on hotel walls, the Americans were cheered even as the defeated Iranians and the American flag unfurled.
This spring Iranian wrestlers will visit Oklahoma, and the US and Iran will play football in Lyons, France, come June.
That pace, however, seems too fast for President Khatami’s domestic foes, who are working hard to thwart any opening, as the arrest last week of a key Khatami supporter Teheran’s mayor (and his release following street protests by his supporters), suggests.
<P>
While sports changed the atmosphere of hate, ongoing diplomatic maneuvers are far more substantive.
During this winter’s crisis with Iraq, the Clinton administration sent messages to Khatami’s government to explain the dispatch of additional American ships and military personnel to the Persian Gulf, and to pledge a limited American deployment based on Iraqi behavior.
Through the UN and other channels, Washington called on Tehran to close the fastest growing hole in international sanctions on Iraq.
<P>
So it did.
In February, Khatami’s government cracked down on illegal oil shipments through Iranian waters that were earning Baghdad hundreds of millions of dollars.
By mid-March, over half of these illegal shipments were stopped.
Because the amount of oil was too small to make much difference on the international oil market, the incentive to act appears purely political – a friendly Iranian wink to the US.
<P>
Tentatively, Iran is starting to address three other top US concerns:
<P>
1.
While hosting1997's Islamic Conference Organization summit last December, Iran drafted and promoted a resolution accepting the 1993 Oslo accords which established the framework for an Arab-Israeli peace.
Palestinian officials called this the most important development in the Islamic world in a decade, since it implicitly accepts Israel’s right to exist.
<P>
2.
During a recent visit by U.N. human rights chief Mary Robinson, Ireland’s former president, Iran pledged not to sponsor attempts to kill Salman Rushdie, the author of the “Satanic Verses” who was sentenced to death by the late Ayatollah Khomeini for blasphemy against Islam.
<P>
3.
A signatory to the Chemical Weapons Convention, Iran’s parliament ratified the accord last year.
Tehran also pledged to detail its chemical weapons programs to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in the Hague -- though it has not yet complied American officials say.
<P>
America contends that Tehran has more to do.
Iranian support for Hizbollah, Hamas, and Islamic Jihad, and other terrorist groups that target Israel remains a stumbling block.
The edict against Rushdie is still hanging out there, even if Iran says that it won’t commission or pay anyone to carry out the threat.
And Iran is still trying to acquire materials for unconventional weapons, particularly long-range missiles.
Iran, in turn, charges that America is stalling on settling cases at the Hague that would release hundreds of millions of dollars in Iranian assets frozen since the 1979-80 hostage ordeal.
<P>
Both President Clinton and President Khatami also face obstacles at home, as the arrest of Tehran’s mayor demonstrates.
Long frozen suspicions limit the ability of both leaders to more fully change course.
In Iran’s unusual power structure, President Khatami lacks full executive authority.
Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, as Supreme Religious Leader, has final word on domestic and foreign policy, and scorns renewed relations with Washington.
Iran’s parliament -- led by Speaker Ali Akbar Natiq-Nouri, an Islamic traditionalist who suffered a humiliating lost to Khatami in the presidential election -- is dominated by conservatives.
Many remain wary, even loath, restoring ties with America.
<P>
In America, Congress restrains the White House’s ability to craft a new Iran policy.
A 1996 law imposes economic sanctions on any foreign company that does more than $20 million of business with Iran.
Its threat to enact other laws forced President Clinton to issue an executive order forbidding American oil companies from doing business with Iran.
Within weeks, the Clinton administration must decide whether to impose sanctions on a French-Russian-Malaysian consortium set to develop Iranian offshore gas fields – a multi-billion consortium originally planned by the American oil company Conoco, which was banned from participation by the executive order.
<P>
The fate of the Conoco deal underscores the challenges implicit in undoing a policy that has hardened into place.
Yet tentative openings by both Tehran and Washington do not appear ill-fated, in stark contrast to the secret and farcical arms-for-hostages swap that took place under President Reagan in 1986.
Both countries are seriously wrestling with ways to move beyond gestures.
America is already appealing for direct government-to-government talks.
Determined diplomacy, as much as goodwill, is needed to push ahead against an inherited inertia backed by a legacy of rage.
