<HEADLINE>
Its the Size of the Market, not the Country that Counts
<P>
ROME: Talk of globalization, of a global economy, is unavoidable.
But at the same time that the world witnessed the growth of this economy, it also saw incredible political fragmentation.
In 1946 there were 76 independent nations, by 1996 there were 192.
Of these, more than half had populations under 6 million; 58, less than 2 ˝ million; and 35, less than ˝ million.
<P>
Size does not seem to determine a country's success.
Small countries – say, Singapore and Taiwan – have grown a lot, and large countries, too, have grown.
Take Japan, despite its recent setbacks, and China in recent decades.
There are small countries – Haiti, for example – as well as large – Nigeria – where the economies are basket cases.
<P>
So the size of countries does not seem to influence growth.
Instead, its the size of the market that influences growth.
In an autarkic economic system with international commerce reduced to the minimum, the political size of the country corresponds to the size of its market.
In the global economy, the market is the rest of the world: the size of the market and the political size of each country are entirely independent.
In today's global economy small countries can prosper quietly trading with the rest of the world: there does not exist any advantage in terms of the size of the domestic market.
<P>
With free international commerce, small regions have smaller costs in becoming independent.
For this reason, ethnic, linguistic, and religious groups can find it more convenient to secede, if they do not have to bare the costs of finding themselves within an economy and a market that are too small.
Clearly, the increase of the number of countries in Eastern Europe is due primarily to the fall of the Soviet Union.
Many small countries in that part of the world, however, may not have been large enough to survive in a less integrated world economy.
<P>
Globalization allowed small postcommunist countries (say, the Baltics) to exist and begin to prosper, at least relatively.
Also the Czech Republic (10 million inhabitants) and the Slovak Republic (5 million) which separated peacefully would not have succeeded if their economies depended on the old Czechoslovak market, and not on the rest of the world.
It is no accident that countries in Eastern Europe are anxious to have access to the common market of Western Europe.
<P>
Quebec, the French-speaking Canadian region, has for many years been on the point of seceding from Canada.
One argument in favor of the separatist choice is that an independent Quebec will belong to the North American Free Trade Area (NAFTA).
Not accidentally, Quebec separatists are among NAFTA's most enthusiastic boosters.
In Africa it is also probable that we will see other secessions (perhaps soon in Nigeria?).
Ethnic conflicts in that part of the world are at the basis of political instability, and of many economic failures: given that it is now possible to be small and prosper, one of the principal costs of secessions has been removed.
<P>
So it may be better to have smaller countries than larger countries subject to unresolved (and perhaps insoluble) ethnic conflicts.
The difficulty is in the fact that it is not always easy to divide peacefully ethnic and religious groups and to redraw boundaries.
Recent experiences in Rwanda and Yugoslavia are a sad example.
<P>
In this race between economic integration and political separatism Europe is in the process of unifying itself.
So is Europe bucking history?
In order to answer this question one has to clarify that there are two ways of interpreting the nature of the European Union.
One of these is that Europe is undergoing a profound economic and monetary integration.
The second is that it is undergoing a political unification, i.e., forming into something like the United States of Europe.
<P>
Despite the acceleration of European integration, regionalism inside many European countries has not diminished.
Basques, Catalans, Walloons, Scots, Bretons, etc. are no less regionalist today than yesterday.
On the contrary.
Therefore, while monetary and, in part, political unification is progressing on the European level, regionalism, federalist, and separatist impulses survive and prosper.
This means that the first scenario is more realistic: an integrated monetary and economic area with the maximum political independence of the regions.
<P>
Europe as an area of economic integration would not be "anti-historical," provided that Europe does not become a fortress closed to the rest of the world.
The United States of Europe, on the other hand, would be an anti-historical process.
In a truly integrated European and global economy there is no need for nations with different languages, traditions, and preferences to unite and coordinate a series of economic policies.
The market coordinates, not the bureaucrats of Brussels.
<P>
A small or a large country in Europe has only a need for a free and a functioning world market, and for internal competition in order to prosper.
European Community directives are useless.
The only thing for which Europe has a need is more freedom of the market and more competition, not more European bureaucrats and another level of government superimposed over national, regional, and local governments.
