<HEADLINE>
Just Growing Pains
<P>
LONDON: Is the world economy on the brink of another recession like the sudden slump of 1990, which threw 20 million workers out of their jobs even in western Europe, pushed commodity prices to their lowest level since the 1940s, shattered stock markets and currencies the world over and unseated apparently invincible politicians like Margaret Thatcher and George Bush?
<P>
Since the early spring the American and European economies have both weakened abruptly.
The increase in American interest rates in 1994 turned out to have a much bigger impact on production and employment there than most economists expected.
Meanwhile, the unhealthy strength of the Japanese yen and the Deutschemark has done even more damage to the industries of Japan, Germany, France and the other core countries of western Europe.
The flight of foreign capital from Mexico has hit the whole of Latin America, and for several countries there, such as Argentina, Venezuela and Brazil, the worst is probably still to come.
Even the "tiger" economies of east Asia have suffered from sharp falls in weakening demand for exports to America, western Europe and Japan.
As this process continues, the world will echo with warnings about recession.
<P>
These warnings may produce setbacks in world stock markets.
They will set off further falls in commodity prices.
And they will cause sleepless nights for producers of raw materials and businesses involved in world trade.
But in the end, the nightmare of a world economic slump will turn out to be just that - a bad dream, which floats away with the morning mist.
<P>
By the start of next year, the American and European economies will again be growing quite strongly.
The prospects of a long period of steady expansion of consumption, investment and trade will be looking more favorable than they have done at any time in the last three decades.
<P>
The main reason for confidence is quite simple.
The present slowdown should be seen as a natural feature of the business cycle and not a sign of impending recession.
Demand tends to grow very rapidly in the year or two after a recession as consumers buy the houses, cars and durable goods they had been too frightened to pay for during the recession.
Once this pent-up demand has been exhausted, inventories naturally build up and growth slows down or even goes into reverse.
After a while industry and housing stocks fall back to sustainable levels, output, employment and incomes begin to grow again at their trend rate and there is a return to steady growth in demand.
<P>
But economists and investors tend to make straight-line projections.
Last year they forgot about this cyclical process and made their over-optimistic forecasts of world growth at the end of 1994.
They are now embarrassed and are going to the other extreme with their recession fears.
<P>
A genuine recession is very different from an inventory correction.
It is a circle of falling demand, leading to falling employment, leading to lower incomes, leading to a further fall in demand.
Such recessions have always been rare because capitalism has a natural self-sustaining momentum.
Since the late 1930s, when the British and Polish economists John Maynard Keynes and Michal Kalecki, explained the role of monetary and fiscal policies in such recessions, they have been rarer still.
<P>
After Keynes and Kalecki it become possible to make a bold statement: "spontaneous" recessions never occur: it takes some deliberate government involvement to cause a recession.
This may sound surprising, but it has been true almost without exception since World War Two.
<P>
Why would elected politicians or central bankers ever want to cause a recession?
Looking back over the last 50 years the answer is clear.
Policy makers will create a recession if and only if they feel it is needed to counteract some other threat to the economy which they consider even more unpleasant.
Usually this threat is an unacceptably high rate of inflation or some kind of external shock, such a surge in the oil price or a currency collapse.
<P>
In fact, each of the last three global recessions was preceded by a sharp acceleration in worldwide inflation and a huge jump in oil prices: in 1990, before the Gulf War; in 1979, after the Iranian revolution; and in 1973, after the Yom Kippur War.
The first recession of the post-war era - in 1954 - was also caused directly by a need to counteract commodity inflation, this time after the Korean War.
The only other recessions of the post-war period - in 1958 and 1970 - were much milder than the three slumps since 1973.
But they were deliberately engineered, at least in the US.
In both cases, there was a perceived need to cool down excessive economic activity, rising prices and, above all, accelerating wages.
In 1970, a part of the inflationary pressure could be blamed on the Vietnam War, but this was not the fundamental cause.
<P>
The real problem in 1970, as in 1958 and in 1990, was that the world economy had grown for a very long period without interruption.
As a result, the capitalist system was in danger of losing its internal discipline.
Workers and trade union leaders were forgetting their fear of unemployment: investors and entrepreneurs were throwing financial resources at risky projects without worrying about a bust.
In fact, after the long golden age of rapid growth and full employment in the 1950's and 1960's the breakdown of discipline was so total that it took three recessions - in 1970, 1974 and 1980-82 - to break the inflationary psychology.
<P>
It was no accident that the long battering to confidence from 1970 to 1982 was followed by almost 10 years of uninterrupted growth.
The question now is whether the discipline of capitalism is again in danger of breaking down as it did in the early 1970s.
The answer is clearly "no".
All over the world, businessmen are cautious, investors are demanding rates of return at reasonable risk, and governments in America and Europe have no reason to allow their economies to collapse.
<P>
Eventually there will be another breakdown in discipline, another burst of inflation and another recession.
But before that, the world can look forward to many more years of healthy growth.
