<HEADLINE>
Let The Post-Soviet State Starve
<P>
KIEV: The new post-communist nations have turned out to be rough and tumble societies.
This is particularly true of the former Soviet Union, where income differentials have risen to Latin American levels, and a third of the population has temporarily fallen below the poverty line.
<P>
In response, many observers conclude that a bigger "social safety net" is needed to aid the poorest.
However, the post-communist states have abundant social expenditures even by West European standards.
Hungary, the Czech Republic, Poland, and Slovakia devote no less than 30-35% of GDP to social expenditures, more than total public expenditure in the USA, Switzerland, and Japan.
Even Russia spent 24% of GDP on social expenditures in 1994, and Ukraine almost 30%.
Clearly, high income differentials and poverty are not caused by insufficient social expenditures.
<P>
The fundamental flaw with the argument for higher social expenditures is that the post-Soviet states are good, as their protagonists believe, but forced by the harshness of the transition to be mean.
Instead, these states are highly corrupt and predisposed to divert money from the general population to the rich.
<P>
Look at what the state is actually doing.
Russia is a good example, because its social expenditures have been analyzed in detail, but the situation appears similar in most post-Soviet countries.
The most striking thing about Russian "social" expenditures is that they are not directed to the poor.
Of total social expenditures of 24% of GDP in 1994, nearly 5% went to housing subsidies, which are regressive.
The larger your apartment, the more your housing is subsidized.
The poorest fifth of the population receives no housing subsidies, because they have no dwelling of their own.
<P>
The employment fund received a mere 0.4% of GDP, and only half of that consisted of unemployment benefits, which go to truly poor people.
"Social security" accounted for 2.4% of GDP, but about half of this is composed of subsidized holidays for the privileged.
Family allowances, included in social security, amount to about 1% of GDP, although the working poor with several children (who do not receive this assistance) form a large and suffering group -- a fact which partially explains the falling birth rate.
Actual social welfare for the poorest is only a fraction of 1% of GDP.
<P>
Russia*s largest social transfers are pensions - 5.5-6% of GDP.
However, almost a third go to people younger than 60, who would not be retired in Western Europe.
Many of these and even older "pensioners" continue to work, while aged and ill pensioners do not get needed additional support.
Hardly any of these substantial social transfers are targeted to the truly poor.
<P>
Other budget expenditures in Russia are even more regressive.
About 7% of GDP continues to go to enterprise subsidies, which largely benefit managers of badly-run state enterprises.
Regional transfers of 2% of GDP go primarily to not very poor regions.
In addition, there are hidden subsidies for the rich, such as "state guarantees" for credits, which tend to be actual gifts.
<P>
Worse conditions prevail in Ukraine, where social transfers amounted to no less than 20% of GDP in 1996.
Half goes to pensions, but about 5% of GDP goes to privileges for the old Nomenklatura -- special pensions, holiday benefits, and the like.
The government is belatedly trying to cut these privileges, but faces severe resistance from the old vested interests.
<P>
Rather than look upon the state as a harbinger of social benefits, it should be recognized that the post-Soviet state is a mean, corrupt organization that benefits the rich and privileged at the expense of the wider population.
Moreover, it is not possible to reform such a vast body in a short time.
Therefore, the primary solution to the problem of poverty must, paradoxically, be to cut parasitic public expenditures.
Public expenditures can be cut by at least 15% of GDP in Russia and Ukraine from 1996 levels, without harm to the poor.
This, indeed, has been achieved already in most CIS countries; Russia and Ukraine are the laggards.
On average, public expenditures in the CIS were down to around 20% of GDP in 1996, notably in Kazakstan and Kyrgyzstan, while the Russian government at all levels spent no less than 39% of GDP.
<P>
More limited efforts, such as in Russia, have a positive effect, too.
Russian income differentials leveled out in 1995, as the government started getting public expenditures and the budget deficit under control, and by January 1997 the share of the population below the poverty line declined to 15% from one third.
Moreover, reducing the corrupt post-Soviet state allows the economy to grow to the benefit of all.
In 1996, Ukraine had the largest fall in GDP in the CIS, and also "suffered" from the largest state revenues as a share of GDP.
Russia came second in both regards.
<P>
So who should help the poor?
Certain support can only come from the state.
Larger child allowances for all will reach the poor and should boost the birth rate.
Unemployment benefits go to the truly poor and should be raised.
Income-tested social welfare is hardly realistic, considering the large unofficial earnings.
The way out may be a cumbersome distribution procedure, such as soup kitchens.
<P>
Pensions, however, do not have to be run by the state.
Other countries with a very corrupt state, such as Chile and Argentina, successfully relegated much of the provision of pensions to the private sector.
Ordinary pensions can and should be based on individual savings and become fully funded.
<P>
In the longer term, the state must be reformed, but that will take time.
The best start is to abolish typically communist organizations, such as branch ministries, to cut the state down to size and to deprive it of goods, such as licenses, which civil servants can sell illegally.
