<HEADLINE>
Liberalism's Morning After In Eastern Europe
<P>
WARSAW: Throughout the postcommunist world faith that liberal politics and economics could deliver prosperity and decent societies at the same time no longer seems as convincing as it did in the euphoria of 1989.
Liberalism’s dynamic, sadly, may be spent.
New shrill voices are rising to fill the void in human nature left by communism’s collapse.
<P>
Only a few years ago freedom of speech, free markets, the right to be left alone were treated as sacred.
Everything from the West was good, everything that reminded us of the East was bad.
We should have known that loving too much often ends up in hatred and rejection, but we still commit this mistake in our private and public lives.
It is impossible to fix a date when the pendulum swung back, but something happened around 1993 in Poland, as it is happening now (for a variety of reasons) in the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Lithuania, and Hungary as well.
Liberalism is beginning to mean being permissive, relativist, amoral, homosexual, pedophiliac; and liberals are portrayed as proponents of pornography, abortion, and free love.
<P>
It would be understandable -- and rather unimportant -- if such attacks came merely from the old, traditional, and nationalist sectors of society, those parties that cling to ancient taboos everywhere.
But in Poland, and elsewhere I venture, this is not so.
Some of the best graduate students in Warsaw University nowadays produce quite serious publications that put practically all blame for the world’s ills on liberalism.
Their ultra-conservative professors applaud these rants, and although they pay lip service to liberal ideas, they speak less about John Stuart Mill than about obscure 19th century German conservatives.
The highly emotional American critic of most things liberal or modern, Alan Bloom, is the god of the young.
To be a follower of Joseph de Maistre, the standard bearer of the French counterrevolution, is more fashionable than to praise the more reflective Alexis de Tocqueville.
<P>
Why, then, do young people so newly come to freedom begin to reject liberalism in such a wholesale fashion?
Fascination with liberal freedom came in Poland and elsewhere at a peculiar moment.
Old social structures were destroyed, socialist customs and habits vanished overnight, former norms and unwritten rules were abandoned.
In the postcommunist social revolution (less often noticed than the political and economic upheavals) families and communities were undermined and (at least in Poland) the Church was too involved in politics to help.
<P>
People were left to withstand the gales of change alone.
To be free but alone is not easy, particularly when habits of dependence are ingrained.
The manners and mindsets of liberal democracy need decades to develop.
It would be trite if it were not so sad: Today’s antiliberal sentiments appear as attractive and simple solutions to a disorienting rise in crime, pornography, and other pathologies of modern life.
<P>
Take the example of pornography.
Pornography, of course, has nothing to do with liberalism.
It existed before the modern era and it is ideologically neutral.
To be sure, liberals prefer to fight pornography with appeals to taste and reason, rather than outright prohibitions.
But our young conservatives have no patience for such arguments.
People are weak and easily tempted.
The liberal faith in reason is an 18th century illusion: reason is inherently fallible and must be supported, or even supplanted, by norms flowing from tradition, religion, family, etc.
If these institutions have decayed under years of communism and the more recent liberal permissiveness -- note how quickly liberalism and communism become identified as the twin children of the Enlightenment in the eyes of their opponents! -- the traditional pillars of morality cannot do their job alone and must be supported by strict laws.
<P>
So widespread is this view that even noncommunist socialist parliamentarians in Poland proposed a law that is supposed to control access to pornography with the help of a council of twelve (I would love to be one of them!) who will spend their days browsing through hundreds, if not thousands, of periodicals and movies in search of the salacious, and decide what to ban.
Their say will be final.
<P>
Another cause of the turn toward the ultraconservative is also standard: fear.
But there is a twist.
It is easy to understand how frightening the political, social, and economic eruptions of the past few years must seem to the old, the poor, and the unemployed.
But it is the young, well educated, and relatively well-to-do who seem to have the deepest craving to banish their fears by nostalgically rediscovering a lost world of blind faith.
Traditionally one was supposed to be a socialist in one's youth and turn conservative later.
The antiliberal mood in Poland and Eastern Europe shows that the young find it also difficult to construct their new identities, and if they do, can only succeed by invoking a kind of longing for the irrational.
<P>
Here things risk becoming dangerous; for here, indeed, is the Gorgon’s head of modern history.
One can be a critic of pornography, if one has nothing better to do, but one cannot reject the West if one has nothing better to offer.
Today’s advocates of antiliberalism can easily -- indeed, it is already happening -- become proponents of a retrospective utopia of corporatism, medievalism, and antimodernism.
In the end, they may lose their struggle, but the costs to the postcommunist societies might be higher than anyone can imagine.
Students may play games without worry, but the game of antimodernity is a dangerous one for the new postcommunist democracies to play.
