<HEADLINE>
Moscow's Boss Under Fire
<P>
MOSCOW: The upcoming elections to the Duma have clouded minds in Russia and around the world, leading people to forget that on December 19 Muscovites will not only choose their representatives to the federal parliament, but will also decide who rules the Russian capital.
Sergei Kiriyenko, the former prime minister and currently a leader of the Soyuz pravykh sil (Union of Right Forces) is bidding to be Moscow's mayor.
Until recently, his efforts were not taken very seriously.
But the popularity of Mayor Yurii Luzhkov has plummeted and an upset could be in the making.
<P>
In early September Kiriyenko started his so-called new glasnost campaign against the Moscow mayor, asserting that the decrees under which the Russian capital operates have spawned an army of financial parasites who are feeding upon Muscovites.
Spravki (official papers) are needed now for just about everything: if an out-of-town guest is coming for a visit or you simply want to remodel your apartment, you need the permission of city hall.
<P>
Horror stories circulating in Moscow describe how an old woman from Ryazan had to hide in the bathroom of her daughter’s apartment as officials from the mayor's fussy bureaucracy snooped about the place, their presence courtesy of information provided by a busy body neighbor.
The hostess did not have time to run around Moscow in order to collect the required documents (five all together) needed in order for her mother to stay with her; she also didn't have $100 (or as some claim $300) to bribe officials.
Such events evoke vivid reminiscences of the horrors of the 1930s when people informed on neighbors and friends to protect their own lives, with the only difference nowadays being that informers have a stake in the money bureaucrats rake in.
<P>
The propiska (a mandatory residence permit), one old communist way of keeping an eye on all citizens of the USSR, ceased to exist with the adoption of the new Russian constitution in 1993.
This was seen as a great step towards freedom and democracy.
Not by Mayor Luzhkov.
Although Russian citizens no longer need a propiska, Moscow residents are required to get one on Luzhkov's demand.
These policies, apparently, are not really aimed at curtailing people's freedoms, it's just that the mayor needs a reliable flow of money to clothe, feed and keep happy his large, dependent bureaucracy.
New laws ensure the flow of new bribes.
<P>
But don't worry, insists the Moscow government, the propiska is for your own good.
It allows us to keep an eye on all those suspicious people from elsewhere, especially those Chechens, so they do not disturb the peace.
The notion that Muscovites should not take the propiska personally, but see it as a necessary security matter, was driven home when Salavdi Abdurazakov was arrested and charged with involvement in the Moscow apartment bombings of a few months ago, as well as with kidnapping a NTV journalists in June 1997.
To everyone's great surprise it turned out that the alleged criminal had an apartment in Moscow rented under an alias, which he was conveniently using while in the Russian capital.
<P>
How was he was able to obtain a residency permit?
Easy: he paid $100, or $300, or $500 to the right person and was thus able to stay in Moscow as long as he wanted.
<P>
Luzhkov's rule is increasingly personal.
Recently Kiriyenko allies posted political ads in Moscow buses.
The next day none of the buses with the posters appeared on their routes.
The day after that, the buses were running but the ads were gone.
When asked about this, Luzhkov said that such advertisements would cause unrest.
But demonstrations against whom?
Against Luzhkov's arbitrary politics, most likely.
<P>
Despite his surging popularity, Sergei Kiriyenko still might not be elected mayor.
His reputation remains damaged from the economic crisis of August 1998.
On the other hand, Russians do have evidence that Luzhkov can be a good manager: Moscow, like Chicago under its famous Mayor Daley, is a city that works.
It works, that is, if you are someone with money.
<P>
Muscovite voters also have evidence, however, that Kiriyenko appears not to have fattened his wallet during the August crisis, while the mayor of Moscow turned the Russian capital into a great kormushka (feeding-trough) for himself and his people.
Mayor Luzhkov now accuses Kiriyenko of smearing him through propaganda, but it is really Luzhkov's own neo-autocratic behavior that has caused his popularity to plummet from the 90% he enjoyed just months ago to under 50% now.
<P>
Luzhkov's victory, if he wins, is not going to come easy this time, which only proves that fears that Russians might dump democracy in order to bring about order may just be exaggerated.
Muscovites are starting to realize that it just may take a democrat to tame corruption and inspire a true civic peace.
