<HEADLINE>
Nato Adrift
<P>
WASHINGTON: Suddenly, after endlessly debating the Eastward extension of Nato and the European Union, political leaders in Bonn, Paris and London seem to be waking up to a basic fact: that none of these plans can work unless the United States remain firmly engaged in Europe - and that this engagement can no longer be taken for granted.
<P>
It should have been obvious all along.
Without the continued willingness of the United States to tie its security to that of Western Europe, there will be no Nato - that goes without saying.
But there also will be no European Union that is more than a mere free-trade area.
For political union in Europa will not come about if countries are suspicious that it will only camouflage domination by a powerful Germany.
The involvement of the world's major power in the affairs of Europe renders the difference of power between European countries less relevant and hence more tolerable.
America no longer has to be the protector of Western Europe, as she was during forty Cold-War years; but she still has to be the moderator of European imbalances.
<P>
The trouble with this task is that, while evident and welcome to Europeans, Germany included, it does not seem very glamorous to Americans.
They still feel confident, of course, with Nato, the military and security organization where they have been the undisputed leader for so long and still enjoy, when they want to exercise it, a leading role.
But Nato, while it remains important for practical military cooperation among its members and as strategic reassurance against any major outside threat, inevitably is becoming less central to American as well as European concerns since such major threats are simply not on the horizon.
To assure that the United States continues its European involvement, therefore, it will be necessary to develop transat1antic links which go beyond those of defense and security.
<P>
That consequence of the end of the Cold war was predictable.
But, as usual in politics, governments prefer not to be disturbed by prealotions until they come true.
Now, for the first time, European politicians seem to be genuinely worried about the future of the Atlantic relationship.
Over the past few months, every self-respecting West European foreign and defense minister has called for some new Atlantic initiative to complement the long-standing security ties, primarily in the trade and economic field.
<P>
But that is easier said than done.
There are indeed serious economic issues which could be better addressed through European-American cooperation.
Moreover, if they are not tackled jointly, they could cause major frictions across the Atlantic which in turn would undermine the security links as well.
Yet neither the countries of Western Europe nor the United States are ready, willing or able to commit themselves to such cooperation.
<P>
In early May I attended a confsrence on this issue organized by the European Institute in Washington, a research center devoted to European-American re1ations.
It had assemb1ed an impressive group of experts and high officials from both the Eurapean Union and the United States.
And not only did they all agree on the desirability of better US-European coordinations, they also presented a long list of what could, and should, be done: lifting remaining trade impediments, perhaps even creating a "Transatlantic Free-Trade Area"; agreeing on rules to facilitate mutual investment; reducing the danger of major monetary crises through closer consulation; addressing jointly major ecological issues.
<P>
I was impressed.
Here, I thought, were the bricks with which to build a stronger Atlantic community; it would now only need political leaders in Europe and the United States to put them together, in the best interest of both.
But somehow that conclusion was not shared by the knewlegeable ladies and gentlemen around the table.
Oh yes, they said there are all issues we have to work on.
But no, this is not the time for new Atlantic institutions; this is a time for patient bureaucrats, not for architects.
<P>
Jean Mannet, the great Frenchman who was the driving force behind European integration, used to warn: "An idea which is not embodied in an institution will die".
History has proven him right a thousand times.
Unless states Cominit themselves to workinq together in agreed procedures towards a jointly defined goal, that goal is unlikely to be reached.
Internationa1 cooperation which depends solely on the good will of governments is constantly exposed to the pressures of the moment, to domestic political calculations, to moods and tactics.
Only institutions give predictability to cooperation, they create the mutual confidence necessary for working together, they establish a vested interest in joint success and put pressure on bureaucracies to deliver.
As long as the United States and the West Enropeans are unwilling to set up new Atlantic institutions to further their economic and political relations, all those promising ideas of coperation will wither.
<P>
It this is so, why then are Americans and West Europeans so reluctant to follow their better instincts?
The answer: neitner side is ready to grant the other what is the essence institutions: a formal say in its own affairs.
The United States dislikes the idea not only because it feels confident about its superior economic power; its people are also preoccupied with internal matters and many of them rernain sceptical even about NAFTA, the free-trade area linking the US to Canada and Mexico And the West Europeans are busily preparing the next and difficult round of stream1ining the operations ot the European Union, a necessary step before it can open itself to Central and East European states.
The last thing West European governrnents want is the United States complicating that process.
<P>
And so what is necessary to do now, is once again relegated to the future.
All the recent suggestions for closer transatlantic ties are not serious proposa1s to negotiate, merely declarations of good intentions But the problem cannot be doaged for long.
Just like the veterans of World War II who commemorated the fiftieth anniversary of the victory over Nazi Gerrmany are a dying out, so the generation, which has been shaped by the early years of the Cold War and whose support for c1ose transatlantic ties was instinctive and unquestioning, is losing political influence in both Europe and America.
<P>
If these ties are not strengthened soon through new institutional links, the Nato bridge, the only US-European institutional arrangement devoted to Atlantic cooperation, will also becorneshaky.
While much of the current Western discussion centers on the extension of Nato to the East, the much more urgent matter is to assure that America remains actively involved in Furope.
If she should cease to do so, there will, after all, not be much to extend.
