<HEADLINE>
Nato Expansion: Postscript or Prelude?
<P>
PRINCETON: Few politicians nowadays -- Russians or Americans, Europeans or Asians -- possess a sense of history.
Judging from the fact that most need ghostwriters for their memoirs, they don’t even know their own personal histories very well.
Had Boris Yeltsin read Leo Tolstoy's "Khadzhi-Murat" and "The Captive of the Caucasus" carefully, he might not have triggered the tragic war in Chechnia.
If Bill Clinton had read the books of George Kennan, that father of the Marshall Plan and policy of "containment" toward the USSR, and a lifelong scholar of Russian civilization, the thoughtless rush to expand NATO might not have occurred, at least not as it did.
<P>
Clinton didn’t have to read Kennan, he could have listened to him.
Last year Kennan tried to make himself heard, even corresponded with Deputy Secretary of State, Strobe Talbott, but to little effect.
In a New York Times op-ed piece of February 5, 1997, he suggested that the period between announcing the decision to expand and its official acceptance could be used "to alter the proposed expansion in ways that would mitigate the unhappy effects."
Again, no one listened.
Last week, expansion was approved in the US Senate by a vote 80 to 19.
Sadly, in overlooking Kennan's suggestions the world may soon encounter an eerie feeling of deja vu.
<P>
When the Yalta Conference divided Europe into spheres of influence, giving the Soviet Union control over Poland and other Eastern European countries, America could not have done much to prevent this division.
According to Professor Kennan, "eighty percent of Europe's liberation was on Russian shoulders.
We understood that Stalin would submit his bill at Yalta and that this bill had to be paid."
The only way for America to prevent Russia from securing its influence over the East would have been to start a war against the Soviet Union, something out of the question.
<P>
With Hitler’s war not yet over, something realistic could still have been achieved with Stalin over the issue of Poland.
In the first volume of his memoirs (great literary works in themselves, and with no ghostwriter in sight), Kennan suggested "a realistic political showdown with the Soviet leaders: when they should have been confronted with the choice between changing their policy completely and agreeing to collaborate in the establishment of truly independent countries in Eastern Europe or forfeiting Western-Allied support and sponsorship for the remaining phases of their war effort."
<P>
Then the minister-counselor of the US Embassy in Moscow, Kennan was not consulted and the Yalta agreement was signed.
The countries of Eastern Europe had to pay a heavy price for Stalin's ambitions, Roosevelt's unrealistic expectations, and Churchill's indifference -- in short, for the West’s illusory attempt to create and maintain an intimate postwar collaboration.
<P>
Kennan concedes that it might very well be that America, at the time, was simply unable to follow his advice to prevent the division of Europe.
Yet, Kennan still "saw no reason why we [the Americans] have to share responsibility for the complications to which it was bound to lead."
<P>
Shortly after his anonymous "X-article" appeared in the magazine "Foreign Affairs" in July,1947, the article itself serving as catalyst to the US policy of "containing" the USSR, NATO came into existence.
Here Kennan was listened to, but still misunderstood.
Containment was not to be solely containment by means of a military threat.
Instead, he sought the political containment of a political threat.
Although Kennan recognized the validity of arguments for the Alliance, he warned against emphasizing the military in East/West relations, suggesting it would only "encourage the impression that war was inevitable and thus distract attention from the most important task," such as "a program of economic recovery."
<P>
Those words, written in 1967, sound up-to-date today.
Programs of economic assistance which Eastern Europe so badly need, including gradual integration into the European Union, are once more being held hostage to a military agenda.
George Kennan predicted all this decades ago, adding that "so long as the dominant Soviet influence over Eastern Europe remains firm, they [NATO arrangements] are apparently adequate to the situation.
But if some day there should be an insistent demand on the part of the Eastern European countries for some sort of reintegration into the European community generally, and if the nature of their relations with the Soviet Union is at that time such as to permit this to happen peacefully, than the limitations of the arrangements concluded in 1949 and 1954 will at once become apparent, and people will have to occupy themselves seriously once again with the logic, if not with the detailed provisions," of the military division of Europe.
<P>
If today’s expansion stops with Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic, Russians would grumble but accept, understanding that this expansion as a direct result of the Soviet Union's initiatives at Yalta.
If NATO spreads into the Baltics to approach Russia's borders, Kennan predicts that Russia "will become even more careless with its nuclear arsenal, settling back into its traditional mistrust of the West to pursue nationalistic goals and develop a more Eastern-oriented political program.
In the end, this will open up the possibility of another round of Cold War."
<P>
In 1994, no Tolstoi warned Russia of the uselessness of fighting the Chechens, so the country learned its lessons the hard way.
In 1998 America is much luckier -- it has in the vigorous 94-year old Kennan an invaluable and willing source of counsel seasoned by decades of Soviet era diplomacy.
Sad to say, even in an age with little vision, prophets remain without honor in their own countries.
As a Russian, I trust Professor Kennan's judgment and analysis of my country and its instincts.
Like him, I too fear that NATO expansion is not the last act of the Cold War, but a possible prelude to a new one.
