<HEADLINE>
NATO Means Solidarity
<P>
PRAGUE: We have come a long way from those poetic, buoyant, and euphoric days that followed communism’s fall; those days of suddenly gained liberties, of enormous and often quite naive hopes.
Eight years later, the enthusiasm, the self-sacrifice and solidarity have long vanished -- at least in my country, for I don’t want to speak for others.
We now live in a hard post-communist reality, when the vices engraved by decades of communism have surfaced, and we are often unable to deal with them.
<P>
These changes do not mean that everything is returning to the old tracks.
On the contrary, what was once a beautiful dream, inciting an almost carnival atmosphere, and what we naively expected to become reality overnight is beginning to materialize despite the difficulties.
The process is no longer perceived as a miracle, but accepted as a matter of course.
<P>
In those years when we, as so-called dissidents, resisted totalitarian rule, we all probably agreed that one objective was dissolution of the Warsaw Pact, that instrument of Soviet imperial power.
We were less clear about what new type of European collective security should be created.
Many perceived NATO as a kind of Warsaw Pact twin, established so that the democracies could jointly protect themselves against the spread of communist power, a twin that would lose it’s raison d’etre once the adversary disappeared.
A new Pan-European security alliance was conceived as a replacement, with the more naive among us believing that, in the new era in which all are democrats, security alliances no longer mattered.
<P>
Gradually, reason prevailed.
NATO needed to change if it wasn’t to become a ridiculous club of cold war veterans.
Incorporating the new democracies would make NATO a Pan-European instrument of collective defense.
When enlargement and related transformation are completed, indeed, Europe will face the prospect of life in peace, security and freedom, of its inner order based on just principles.
<P>
But Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic, the first three postcommunist countries to join NATO, can be useful members only if we implement important practical changes in our own defence systems.
All legislation pertaining to security and armed forces must be harmonized with NATO standards.
We must train our commanders to think differently, and much must be done for what is called interoperability, particularly in the area of control and communications.
Structural changes in our armed forces must be completed.
Our armaments must be modernized gradually.
<P>
All this will be costly, but less so than an isolated defence, an isolation doomed to fail.
These issues are now the subject of daily political discussion.
Still, I believe they are not the most vital ones we face.
<P>
The term alliance has various meanings.
It can mean two or more countries joining forces to face a potential enemy more efficiently; or, on the contrary, to invade and gain control over some other country.
The structure of such an alliance is principally closed -- it is a structure in which power is more important than value.
Such alliances can be composed of countries with very different political systems, for they are not allied by shared values, but by their interest in maintaining or strengthening their own power, either in their own protection, or worse, in expansion.
<P>
An alliance such as NATO is and must be different.
It must be an alliance designed for the protection of the values of those served by its power: for human rights, the rule of law, democracy, freedom of expression and a market economy.
It is therefore an alliance designed to protect not only national sovereignty or geopolitical interests, but to protect certain kinds of human culture and civilization.
That means that the principal bond of such an alliance is not a mere calculus of geopolitical interest, or of potential enemies, but something much deeper: solidarity.
<P>
I firmly believe that this is how NATO sees itself -- as an alliance of solidarity of those who share common values, the principle of solidarity and openness being rooted in the very nature of these values.
For it would be quite difficult to imagine somebody respecting human rights and freedom only in his or her own country.
Openness and the principle of solidarity belong to the very substance of NATO and, as such, they are rooted also in the text of the Washington Treaty that opened the door to NATO expansion.
<P>
NATO membership is not mere security protection, the price of which is a sad obligation to be ready to protect another country as the price for that country’s readiness to protect us.
For me, NATO is no mere bargain or market relation but an expression of the spirit.
The spirit of love for freedom, the spirit of solidarity, the spirit of the will to protect, jointly, our common cultural wealth, the spirit of alliance that is not opportunistic but emphatically moral.
<P>
I believe it would be contrary to the spirit of this alliance, and to the principle of its openness if, content with our own invitation, we forgot about those who have not been invited.
Common sense tells us that all NATO candidate countries cannot be accepted simultaneously: that would probably cause the Alliance’s collapse.
Still, it must be repeated that NATO is open to all Euro-Atlantic democracies; it is not closed to any country for this or that tactical reason.
Romania and Slovenia’s turn will come.
So, too, the three Baltic states.
And other European countries, even Ukraine, might one day seek membership.
<P>
This can happen only if the process of NATO enlargement and transformation goes hand in hand with strengthening a partnership with the Russian federation.
Eighteen years ago Poland introduced the word solidarity with a capital S into the history of the 20th century.
Today, NATO’s core must also be solidarity with a capital S!
