<HEADLINE>
Opening the Balkans
<P>
NEW YORK: Yugoslavia's President Milosevic has succumbed to the military might of NATO and we can sigh with relief.
To justify our intervention, however, we must now assure a better future not only for the people of Kosovo, but for the whole region, including the rump of Yugoslavia which remains in Mr Milosovic's hands.
We cannot go on reacting to crises as they arise in the Balkans, especially as our actions can have such severe unintended and adverse consequences.
We must bring a positive, constructive vision to bear, the vision that has created the European Union.
<P>
The Balkans cannot be reconstructed on the basis of nation states.
We have seen that the attempt to establish ethnic homogeneity can lead to intolerable atrocities, human suffering and destruction.
It is also impractical.
The population of Yugoslavia, even after the exclusion of Kosovo, remains about 25% non-Serb.
The only way to peace and prosperity is to create an open society in which the state plays a less dominant role and borders diminish in importance.
That is the road that the European Union has chosen.
<P>
The idea of the open society was first proposed by Henry Bergson in his "Two Sources of Religion and Morality" (1932).
He distinguished between a tribal idea of morality and a universal idea.
The former leads to a closed society; the latter to an open society.
The concept was further developed by Karl Popper in his famous book "The Open Society and its Enemies" where he showed that the open society may also be threatened by universal ideas if they claim a monopoly of the truth; but the problems of the region are best understood in terms of Bergson's formulation.
In the wars of the Yugoslav succession we have seen a struggle between the ethnic and the civic concepts of citizenship.
In Yugoslavia the civic concept lost out and Yugoslavia disintegrated.
In Western Europe the civic concept prevailed and the integration of Europe stands in stark contrast with the disintegration of Yugoslavia.
The European Union must now extend its protective umbrella over the region.
<P>
The region itself must be seen to be larger than the former Yugoslavia because humpty-dumpty cannot be put together again.
It must include Albania and Bulgaria and it ought to be open to countries like Romania and Moldova.
We must not repeat the mistakes made in Bosnia.
Reconstruction efforts in Bosnia failed to generate momentum because the size of the territory is too small and the various governmental entities, from federal to local, insist on having their not-so-clean fingers in every pie.
<P>
This time our engagement must extend to the entire region.
This point is well understood by politicians.
The Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe signed in Cologne, Germany on June 10 provides an excellent starting point.
It establishes three working groups: for democratization and human rights; for economic reconstruction, development and cooperation; and for security issues.
It offers a framework that is waiting to be filled with content.
The content can be drawn from a paper prepared by the Center for European Policy Studies (CEPS) in Brussels.
<P>
The core of the plan consists of four interrelated steps:
<P>
(1) The European Union takes control of the customs services of the participating countries.
<P>
(2) The European Union compensates the countries for the loss of customs revenues out of the European Union budget.
The amount of subsidy from the EU budget would be in the region of 5 billion euro annually.
This fits perfectly into the Europe 2000 budget agreed in Berlin.
<P>
(3) The compensation may reflect the potential rather than the actual loss of revenues, but the element of subsidy would be strictly conditional on performance.
For instance, Serbia would have to conduct elections under OSCE auspices in order to be eligible.
This is more likely to remove Milosevic from power than the bombing.
<P>
(4) With budgetary support from the EU, the countries would move to the euro (or the DM until the euro is introduced) as the common currency.
Bulgaria already has a successful currency board based on the DM; the other countries would not even need a currency board.
<P>
Taken together these four measures would, in the first instance, create a free trade area similar to Benelux.
As soon as the EU is satisfied with its control over customs, it would admit the area to the European Common Market.
Trade in agricultural products, which is the mainstay of the region, may remain subject to restrictions but the EU would have to show some generosity for the plan to succeed.
The second step would occur within a foreseeable future, say two years.
In the more distant future, the countries would also be admitted as candidates for full membership.
<P>
A number of other steps would be necessary: credit facilities for reconstruction and investment; technical assistance for establishing the rule of law; support for education, management training, independent media and civil society.
The needs are well-known and my network of Open Society foundations are already active in the various program areas.
But it is the four interrelated steps outlined above that hold out a prospect for a better future.
People in the region are clamoring for it.
<P>
Customs do not merely separate countries; they are also a potent source of corruption and interference.
Abolishing customs duties would reduce the ability of governments to interfere with economic development; they would have to compete to attract investment to their territory instead of posing obstacles as they do at present.
The initial contribution from the EU would be multiplied manifold by private investment.
That is the factor that made the Marshall Plan so successful.
<P>
This plan for an open society in Southeast Europe would impose costs on EU members, but the amounts are small because the whole region is smaller in economic terms than the Netherlands.
The costs compare favorably with military and humanitarian intervention; in human and political terms there is no comparison.
