<HEADLINE>
Privatization Unbound
<P>
Outside the postcommunist world, the great wave of industrial privatization has crested.
In the postcommunist countries privatization remains focused on areas traditionally associated with the private sector.
But governments can do much more, suggests Sir Alan Walters, the intellectual architect of Britain’s privatization revolution, and the reformers in Eastern Europe, Russia, and the NIS should take note.
Britain’s experience with telecoms, railroads, water, gas, and other utilities shows that "unconventional" privatizations in areas which many had believed to be "natural monopolies" also benefit by a shift to the private sector.
<P>
LONDON: Although a few privatizations had been tried in the 1970s, the process was usually hesitant and incomplete.
Only when inflation had been substantially reduced and capital markets started to develop in the 1980s, was it possible to begin, at first modestly, what turned into the great wave of privatization of the latter half of the decade.
<P>
I was at the inception of the Thatcher privatization program in Great Britain which began in 1980.
We had only limited experience in this area, mostly having to do with the reprivatization in the 1950s of British Road Services and other transport concerns.
Not surprisingly, then, we began rather cautiously with returning to competitive environments previously nationalized businesses, most of which retained their former private sector structures and could be easily delivered from the dead hand of politicized bureaucracy and into the bracing air of the marketplace.
State enterprises dominated by bloody minded or politicized trade unions were also put high on the priority list.
<P>
Conventional wisdom told us that there were many industries -- typically the so-called "natural monopolies" -- where privatization would be, at best, irrelevant and probably harmful.
In the early 1980s, commonplace opinion held that these industries included telecoms, water, electricity generation and distribution, gas, and various services.
The argument was that the efficiency of telecoms dictated that there should be only one connection from the switching box to the household or office, and that, in the case of the other utilities, there needed to be only one wire or pipe per customer.
The enormous size of electricity, gas generation, and water supply reinforced the seeming "naturalness" of these monopolies.
Insofar as the idea behind privatization was to reap the benefits of increased efficiency through competition, it appeared that little could be achieved and much lost through the privatization of such utilities.
<P>
Privatization of British Telecom (BT) in 1984 showed that rapid technological change, particularly cable, digital, and "wireless" developments, had eroded the "natural" monopoly of telecoms.
Moreover, under private ownership, decisions on investment, finance, and day-to-day management generally were freed from the bureaucratic and politicized constraints characteristic of state ownership which were particularly disastrous in industries where rapid technological innovation was necessary.
Similarly, it became possible to jettison projects pushed forward not by technical, but for political, reasons.
<P>
To be sure, a competitive environment in areas previously thought of as "natural monopolies" sometimes had to be created first by deregulation, and this was part and parcel of the privatization process.
Once this was done, however, privatization turned out to be not only possible, but also, as in the case of BT, to bring a huge expansion in output and quality, even as prices dropped, investments in new technologies soared, and profits rose.
<P>
BT’s success inspired the Thatcher government to privatize other utilities.
In the case of water, it was not so obvious that any great technological advances were stymied by public ownership.
But there had long been inefficient backlogs in investment, largely due to financial constraints and ineffectual management, and privatization opened up another avenue of success.
Suddenly, the various water companies had management cadres that were subject to both friendly and, more important, hostile takeover bids.
If managers did not produce suitably high rewards for shareholders, the latter could vote for change, which they have.
<P>
Ironically enough, one of the big criticisms of the privatization of utilities is that they produced profits which have been variously described as obscene, astronomic, excessive, exploitative, or destabilizing.
But the reason why profits have been so high is that the majority of people, including the regulators of these industries, had vastly underestimated the abysmal inefficiency of public ownership and the great gains to be obtained by privatization.
Stock prices of the privatized utilities were thus set quite low, and profits – reflecting genuine efficiency gains -- far exceeded expectations.
The electricity generating industry, for example, has produced more electricity since privatization, but reduced its workforce by 40%.
Not surprisingly, the value of the shares soared.
<P>
But customers screamed that they were being exploited; they demanded that the regulators do their "job" and stop the "monopolistic exploitation" of the consumer by ordering large price cuts.
The incoming Labour government condemned the "giveaway" price of the shares, and later the salaries that "fat cat" management awarded themselves.
The Blair government promised a "windfall" tax -- a one-time levy amounting to 5 billion pounds on the utilities -- and a more punishing regulation of prices.
<P>
Of course, such taxes will not catch those who actually enjoyed the benefits of the market’s underestimation of the privatization effect.
The majority of those who originally bought the shares will be immune to the tax because they sold out to institutional investors.
The tax will be paid by today’s owners, the pension funds.
All it did was to satisfy the popular call for blood by the media and a part of the public.
<P>
The general lesson of these unconventional privatizations, then, to be heeded by postcommunist reformers and others elsewhere, is that enormous gains are to be made by privatizing so-called "natural monopolies" and opening them to efficient management and investment.
Sadly, there is another lesson as well: beware of underestimating these gains because tomorrow’s booming profits will inevitably lead to future expropriations.
