<HEADLINE>
Russia's Center Is Failing to Hold
<P>
MOSCOW: For most of its nine years of postcommunist transition Russia's political blocs were too deeply divided to work together except negatively – this at a time when the country demanded resolute and positive decisions.
Recently, however, Russian politics witnessed a spate of political marriages, some tactical, some "shotgun" unions that smack of desperation.
No matter how contrived, these political alliances are revealing: they highlight Russia's political decentralization from which there now appears to be no turning back.
<P>
Proof of the potency of Russia's political decentralization has come from the center itself.
Yuri Luzhkov, Moscow's bumptious mayor, allied his Fatherland Party with All Russia, a grouping bringing together a majority of Russia's provincial governors.
Once hitched to the governors, Mayor Luzhkov was able to attract as their candidate for president next year Yevgeny Primakov, the popular former spymaster-cum-prime minister (and supposedly Russia's most trusted man), who had been sacked by President Yeltsin last May due to his very popularity.
<P>
Originally, provincial governors were seen as creatures of Boris Yelstin, who appointed them after the break-up of the USSR and used their control of the upper house of the Duma as a cudgel to check the communist-dominated lower house.
But in the mid-1990s governorships became elected offices.
Through this electoral legitimacy (no matter how rigged the elections), Russia's governors secured enormous weight in the political system.
They now jealously guard their power and band together to protect their prerogatives and perks.
Moreover, governors play a vital role in such key issues as determining whether a region attracts foreign investment or is shunned by international businessmen.
<P>
One of the main power bases of the governors is their decisive influence over the voters in their regions who will decide the outcome of this December's parliamentary elections, as well as the presidential elections next June.
By adding the governors to his electoral machine, Primakov has stolen the men who turned the last presidential elections Yeltsin's way.
<P>
The defection of the governors, however, may be a double-edged sword for Primakov, who announced in his first campaign address on August 30 that what his presidency would offer Russia was a strong central state with renewed controls on parts of the economy.
But, because of the electoral deals just completed, as yet president Primakov may find himself in a weaker position than that occupied by Yeltsin.
For if the Fatherland/All Russia alliance gains control of the State Duma (the lower house of Parliament), the governors would assume even more weight, for not only would they control the Federation Council (the upper house) but the deputies in the lower house of the Duma would likely be men deeply indebted to their local governors for their seats.
<P>
For now, however, there is a delicate balance between the Kremlin and the regions.
Under the Russian system, most taxes are centrally collected, so governors need good relations with federal authorities so as to maintain access to the ever-shrinking federal pie.
Indeed, even if money is appropriated for regional needs, it is sometimes not released because the Kremlin lacks the resources to keep its commitments.
A good governor is now defined by his ability to bring home the bacon.
After the elections, governors may demand that they get direct control of the pork.
<P>
In addition to federal power holding them in check, the governors are constrained by internal divisions.
Until now, the main institutional form of provincial coalition-building has been interregional associations that bring together governors in defined geographic regions, such as Siberia or the Urals.
But even within similar groups, there are clear splits between rich and poor regions.
Poor regions want to use federal resources to ensure that their residents have a minimum standard of living; richer regions want to invest money in industrial development, hoping such development will spark a revival that lifts the entire economy.
<P>
Only this economic fault line may prevent Russia's governors, though they will likely shift even more power from the center, from completely dominating the federal scene.
While many of the most important governors support removing the Communist majority from the State Duma to ensure less ideologically and more regionally based governance, they are divided on other crucial issues.
So even if the coalition of the governors, Luzhkov, and Primakov win a majority of seats in the parliament's lower house this December, there is no guarantee that the new members will be able to forge a consistently united program.
<P>
Feuds are appearing.
Last week Fatherland and All Russia each held separate congresses to lobby for their interests in forming the joint party list.
In addition, the Agrarian party, a former ally of the Communists, was invited by Primakov into the alliance.
Luzhkov and the governors were not thrilled by this new complication in dividing the future political spoils.
Moreover, Primakov has offered Yevgeny Nazdratenko, the notoriously corrupt governor of Primorsky Krai in the Far East a big role in the alliance, leaving Sergei Dudnik, the region's current Fatherland leader, friend of Luzhkov, and Nazdratenko foe in limbo.
<P>
These budding conflicts hint that the Fatherland/All Russia alliance may not be as all powerful as people fear, save for one thing: the alliance's opponents are even more divided than it is.
The combative pacifist Gregory Yavlinsky of Yabloko and Sergei Stepashin, the former prime minister and architect of the Chechen War, now stand uneasily atop a joint party list for the December Duma elections.
Viktor Chernomyrdin says one day that he is willing to cooperate with his successor as prime minister, the free marketeer Sergei Kirienko, but huffs the next about dealing with his reform-minded predecessor, Yegor Gaidar.
Two days after that, he blubbers that he is thinking of throwing in his lot with Primakov and Luzhkov.
<P>
Russia's center/right seems to have forgotten the old maxim that, when in trouble, politicians should hang together, lest they hang separately later.
Those divisions on the right, more than anything else, look likely to be the key factors that could bring Primakov, the would be saviour, to power next year.
