<HEADLINE>
Russia: Meltdown or Stabilization?
<P>
CAMBRIDGE: Another crisis, another government.
So sputters postcommunist Russia.
By restoring Viktor Chernomyrdin as prime minister Boris Yeltsin apparently hopes to stanch the economic bloodletting of the past month.
That can’t happen if Mr. Chernomyrdin returns to his stodgy, do-nothing ways.
<P>
Only a month ago, in another cliff hanger weekend, Russia received a major IMF and G-7 bailout package; important reforms were promised, a measure of confidence was restored.
In no time, Russia was back in the tank; decisive reform did not happen, confidence did not last, overnight investors tried to bail out - the rats left the ship, if you like the unflattering image.
<P>
Whether Russia now enters meltdown remains to be seen; clearly it is a prospect.
But so is the possibility that the current crisis galvanizes enough consensus to move ahead and do some of the hard work that every country in the end achieves.
Its is only a question of time, and of how deeply living standards fall in the interim and how much politics deteriorates toward extremism, just as in the 1920s.
In the end every unstable country stabilizes because instability becomes simply unbearable.
<P>
Russia’s problem was debt and deficits, not the exchange rate.
What starts as a debt problem, however, easily becomes a currency problem when foreign creditors and the locals just as much flee to the safe haven of the dollar.
Russia resolved the hemorrhage problem for a moment as the moratorium and capital controls stemmed the outflow of dollars from the central bank.
But that is no more than a reprieve.
Confidence must now be restored and the only way to accomplish this is to establish stable and sound public finance - the same problem Russia faced and failed to solve for the past decade.
<P>
Like many other emerging economies and new democracies, Russia has trouble limiting its budget deficits.
Real progress was accomplished a few years back when money creation and hyperinflation were stopped.
Budgetary problems, however, were not solved; borrowing replaced the promiscuous printing of rubles.
Not surprisingly, over time a debt problem replaced hyperinflation.
<P>
Because Russia, just like many other doubtful borrowers, could only get short term loans, its financing was highly precarious.
Any day, creditors could stage a run, demand immediate repayment only to find that there was no money to meet their claims.
Not surprisingly, to face this risk creditors demanded record interest rates.
Also unsurprisingly, budget deficits and record interest rates combined into a snowball of debt.
A process that familiar in high debt countries (most recently Mexico), in Russia went into the express lane.
<P>
By freezing its short term debt - some $60 billion - Russia stopped the clock.
When it returns to the game, success requires that several conditions be substantially satisfied.
First, existing debts needs to be disarmed: their maturity must be lengthened, the rescheduled debt must carry only moderate interest and the amount outstanding needs to be cut; creditors have been prepaid over recent years with record interest rates so it is now time for a "hair cut".
Debt restructuring, however, needs to be well done and cannot possibly be punitive, but the debt burden and its terms need to be reconfigured to meet Russia’s ability to pay.
The process is an ugly and at times a humiliating one, but it certainly is a time-honored process in emerging market finance.
<P>
Second, Russia needs to make immediate and striking progress on deficit reduction.
This means more than passing a few virtuous sounding resolutions in the Duma.
As anyone who followed Latin America’s debt crisis of the 1980s knows, the question is not merely one of laws but of implementation, and that takes time and fierce determination.
<P>
Yeltsin’s gross indecisiveness on marching his political cronies and the mafia business community to the tax office (or jail) accounts for much of the difficulty; lack of broad based taxation at affordable rates is a key issue.
Appointing high profile tax collectors like Boris Fyodorov has little effect if they are not allowed to actually collect the taxes due.
<P>
The third step is to stick with serious monetary policy that avoids all and any chance of renewed inflation.
Russia’s central bank is the best part of the Russian story recently.
It stopped hyperinflation and stuck to stable and predictable policies.
Any attempt to undermine its independence or bring it back to financing budget deficits would be fatal.
More than ever, the Bank’s independence must be strengthened.
A currency board would be a very good next step.
<P>
Finally, Yeltsin must recognize that Russia’s failure to grow in almost a decade of post communism has much to do with his temporizing on economic reform.
Unless Russia grows, its public finances cannot be stabilized.
Growth requires a dramatic advance in economic institutions (property rights, the legal process, a curtailing of corruption) and a major advance in privatization including, agriculture.
Among other benefits, this would undermine the power of the communists; of course, that makes it extra difficult to do.
Yeltsin will make it in history if he opens an offensive against all those, like the communists, who have no agenda, rather than allowing reformers to be discredited by the lack of economic reform.
<P>
Russia has no center of gravity other than the hope of its young to escape from poverty and instability.
While the borrowing lasted, and speculation took the forefront, everybody could dream.Russia is now back to the starting line.
It has to build a normal economy otherwise the latent radicalism of communists, tsarists and fascists will destroy all hope for a stable economy and society.
Russia is at a cross roads, the next stop is normality or collapse.
Unfortunately, the bad course is the most likely and deep scepticism is justified.
