<HEADLINE>
Small Success in Bosnia
<P>
HAMBURG: If the Balkan War had you worried about NATO’s ability to cope with conflict in Europe, you can, apparently, relax.
Since NATO finally decided to show its teeth, in particular since IFOR troops entered Bosnia to secure a fragile peace, Western politicians have hailed this as proof that the crisis in the alliance is over.
Now they run the risk of fooling themselves by believing what they say.
<P>
Addressing an international gathering that included Russia’s First Deputy Minister, US Secretary of Defense William Perry summed up the optimists’ version: "It is in Bosnia where we are sending the message that NATO is the bedrock on which the future security and stability of Europe will be built.
It is in Bosnia where future NATO members are showing themselves ready and able to shoulder the burdens of membership.
And it is in Bosnia where we are showing that we can work as partners with Russian forces.
Bosnia is not a peacekeeping exercise.
It is the real thing."
NATO’s new Secretary General, former Spanish Foreign Minister Solana, echoed these sentiments: "In Bosnia we have opportunity not only to end a war in the Balkans, but to lay the foundations for an enduring structure of peace across a now undivided and democratic Europe."
<P>
Bosnia the answer to NATO’s prayers?
To a lack of common purpose; to feckless American leadership; to membership for East European democracies; to cooperative relations with Russia?
After years of frustrations, politicians may be excused for surrendering to the temptations of oversell.
But none of the fundamental questions facing the Western Alliance have been answered in Bosnia.
<P>
Does Bosnia provide NATO a common purpose lacking since the disappearance of the Soviet Union?
Many who hope that this new purpose will take the form of more peace - missions like to think so.
They forget how long it took NATO to get its act together in Bosnia, and how many conditions had to fall into place before the allies took the plunge: mounting pressure in the United States; irritation between Europeans and Americans; realization that NATO passivity will mutate into irrelevance.
They also blind themselves to a fact of post-cold war international security: instead of one major threat that unites an alliance, there are a multitude of dangers which, because they affect countries differently, disunite allies.
After Bosnia, who can be confident the allies will act decisively together if another conflict erupts?
<P>
Does Bosnia demonstrate renewed American willingness to lead in less than vital European conflicts?
No.
True, American leadership in promoting peace in Bosnia underlines the scarcely surprising fact that once the United States lends its power to efforts of conflict resolution, chances of success improve considerably.
No assurance of American leadership in future conflicts exists.
Indeed, the end of US involvement in the Balkans is in sight: to assure political support for dispatching one third of IFOR troops, President Clinton agreed to total withdrawal of the US contingent within twelve months, no matter what.
All Bosnia demonstrates is that America may still dominate.
But it is an erratic, not an automatic, dominance, and depends more on domestic politics than world events.
While US leadership will generally be welcome, it will now be unpredictable except in dire circumstances.
<P>
Nor does Bosnia answer questions about how to bring Russia into a framework of European stability.
No doubt, a Russian regiment working with NATO to support IFOR is a welcome innovation; it may help Russian military men to learn through experience that NATO is not the hostile bloc Russian nationalists like to caricature.
That does not mean Russian leaders are any closer to accepting NATO expansion as a major contribution to European and Russian security, or to establishing an institutionalized dialogue with the West that respects the sovereignty of Russia’s neighbors.
<P>
Bosnia may even make Russia more demanding.
Cooperation, they may decide, comes with a price: accommodating Russian opposition to NATO’s eastward enlargement.
After all, Moscow has already discovered that forceful protests generate second thoughts in many Western capitals.
Why should Bosnia produce a change of heart?
<P>
This is why Western politicians fool themselves in claiming that joint efforts in Bosnia will bring both cohesive purpose to the Western Alliance as well as overcome Russian opposition to what is today’s only unifying Alliance mission: fostering stability everywhere in Europe.
This would be an illusion even if operations in the Balkans prove a success -- a big if given the magnitude of the task and the paucity of instruments.
<P>
The risks are greater than the promise.
Should IFOR fail, roadblocks on NATO activism in future out-of-area military conflict management will arise.
Recrimination will poison American/European relations and undermine America’s willingness to remain committed to European stability.
If NATO fails in Bosnia, its future is in jeopardy.
<P>
Not only is it premature to assume success in Bosnia; it is irresponsible to present is as a symbol for a new NATO and a new Europe.
Instead of pumping symbolism into a suspect success, Western leaders must work to prevent the mission’s collapse.
Failure in Bosnia, would signal’s NATO’s debility; success is no more than an encouraging precedent.
Progress, it is true, is the child of small successes, and to that extent success in the Balkans may catalyze progress towards a new order of European stability.
But it is wise not to cross the river until one comes to it, and to exercise modesty where uncertainty reigns.
