<HEADLINE>
Stalin and Memory
<P>
"The duty we owe to history is to rewrite it," said Oscar Wilde.
As a Russian, I am familiar with rewriting history.
The Soviet Union spent a century touching up the warts on Lenin's nose, revising harvest statistics, and making the dying Yuri Andropov look less cadaverous.
But in dealing with Stalin--dead 50 years today-- most of us now rewrite history by pretending that a chunk of it never happened.
<P>
Don't get me wrong: Stalin has not disappeared like people sent to the gulag.
He has not been blotted from our memories the way Trotsky and Bukharin were cropped out of official photographs.
<P>
Once, as I was getting out of a Moscow taxicab, the driver lifted his scarf to show a Stalin photograph pinned to his jacket.
I thought about this sly gesture.
He seemed to represent a true underground, someone who felt shocked and betrayed by the world that arose out of Gorbachev's glastnost and perestroika .
<P>
But clinging to the past uncritically is probably better than allowing the past to dominate the present.
After all, it was history that incited Yugoslavs to turn their corner of Europe into a medieval slaughterhouse of rape, pillage, and siege.
On June 28 th , 1989, St Vitus's Day, while most Eastern Europeans were daring to dream of a non-communist future, a million Serbs prepared to leap into the past with Slobodan Milosevic, descending on the Field of Blackbirds in Kosovo to mark the 600th anniversary of Serbia's defeat by the Turks.
<P>
History, of course, is not some medicine with a label cautioning about the proper dosage.
History is what gives nations their character, their institutions, their identity.
It can be misread or misused, but never rationed.
Milosevic did not give the Serbs an overdose of history; he simply administered it as they imagined it, undiluted by criticism.
<P>
Plainly, the best thing is to confront history--and oneself--forthrightly, and to draw the most honest conclusions.
But what are the right conclusions when you are dealing with history as bloodstained and corrupting as Stalin's era?
Some are ready to look at the past with an open mind, in pursuit, if you will, of self-improvement.
Others are more concerned to use it to justify failure or even aggression; this is history as self-pity.
Still others indulge in simple self-delusion.
<P>
Self-improvers are the rarest.
Recently, only Germany, or rather West Germany, unambiguously confronted its past in order to remake itself.
It took the enormity of the Holocaust to bring about the necessary self-examination.
Anything less terrible might not have been enough.
<P>
For Russians, long split between Slavophiles and westernizers, victimhood vies against self-examination where history is concerned.
In 1989 and 1990, as communism collapsed and glasnost took hold, many Russians hungrily sought the "facts."
What caused the famines of the 1930's and were they planned?
How many people died in the purges?
What did Khrushchev actually say about Stalin in his secret speech of 1956?
Historical facts became front-page news.
<P>
For others, the demise of the political system meant the end not merely of the only historical narrative they knew, but of an empire and a sense of national identity as well.
Into that void stepped right-wing politicians and historians portraying Russians as the victims of a "false culture," with foreigners responsible for all problems.
Many now find it difficult to know what to make of seven decades of communism.
More have given up trying.
<P>
It will never be easy to produce a version of Russian history that all Russians agree on; competing conceptions of national identity militate against it.
But some other countries sloughing off the skin of communism are only too ready to adopt a new history--even one based on fancy and invention--to suit current needs.
<P>
Ukraine provides an example of this.
Does Ukraine have a history?
Well, the place certainly does, but is the place a country?
Ukraine means, literally, "on the edge."
It is more a frontier than a region, let alone a country.
So it is well suited to an invented history--and who better to supply it than a Ukrainian Diaspora eager to boost the land of their forefathers?
It may be no accident that independent Ukraine's first history textbook was written in Toronto, not Kiev.
<P>
So far, Russia, a country of little moderation, has alternated between rampant discussion or absolute silence and self-deception about Stalin.
These swings keep many people (not only the elderly) voting communist.
German Gref, Russia's young minister of Trade and Economics, responded to a sympathetic question about his parents being prisoners in the Gulag by saying, "So what, all were prisoners then."
<P>
In truth, few people other than the Germans are ready to be honest in their Vergangenheitsbewältigung , their coming to terms with the past.
Most others dwell on the laudable, suppress the inglorious, and embellish the rest--or else pretend that the past doesn't exist at all.
<P>
Before succumbing to pessimism, however, there is something else to consider.
Although it is impossible to have too much history, it is possible to spend too much time looking into it.
For like the past, the future also needs to be written.
If Russians are silent about Stalin, it may be because we are busy writing that history of the future.
