<HEADLINE>
Swinging to Stability in Hungary
<P>
BUDAPEST: Since 1989, Hungary has conducted three general elections.
All have been free, fair, and without corruption under an electoral law drawn up, surprisingly, by the country’s last Bolshevik-style parliament.
<P>
On June 18th Viktor Orban, the leader of FIDESZ (the association of young democrats), the surprise winners of last month’s parliamentary elections, will become Hungary’s prime minister; at 34 years of age he is the youngest in the country’s history.
In the decade since Orban first appeared on the scene - as a student leader at the reburial of Imre Nagy in June 1989 he defiantly called for the removal of all Soviet troops from Hungary - he has recast FIDESZ from a motley group of postgraduate liberal intellectuals into a disciplined (if more conservative) party.
FIDESZ’s victory, however, is not Orban’s or his party’s alone; for Hungarian politics now appears to be emerging into a stable two party or party/bloc system.
<P>
This course was not at all predictable.
In 1990 at the time of the first postcommunist elections, Hungarians had lost faith in government, all government.
They did not believe in any of the new or existing parties, nor did they immediately place their faith in parties from Hungary’s past (like the Smallholders) who had reemerged from communist oppression.
People entertained the illusion that the transition from communism would be fast and relatively painless.
Still, they gave their early support to the MDF, a conservative party led by the historian Joszef Antal.
Obsessed more with the past than the future, bereft of practical policies, the MDF failed miserably and faded quickly.
<P>
The surprise here was not Antal’s failure but the responsible behavior of the former communists, the MSZP, both as an opposition party and after their return to power.
Out of office, they did not try to scuttle reforms but were a "loyal," western style opposition.
Back in office after 1994, the postcommunists were moderate, left of center realists - cynics, some say.
<P>
Although the MSZP benefitted from a wide public perception that "things were better under communism" the party nonetheless governed responsibly, for the most part.
Inflation was beaten back; the country’s huge communist era debts pared down and paid off; the economy began to grow; membership in Nato was negotiated successfully.
Indeed, Hungarian troops have served with distinction in Bosnia.
<P>
The MSZP kept its promises.
So the illusion that the "ghoulash" communism of Janos Kadar could be restored - and to its credit, Horn’s government did not encourage such nostalgia - went unfulfilled.
The MSZP was even honorable enough not to buy votes by making promises that the country could not afford, instead asking voters to continue biting the bullet of sound reform policies.
<P>
FIDESZ, which began its political life as a pure "liberal" party will now govern from the right.
Indeed, the party has even amended a new title to its name - Hungarian Civic Party - to reflect its new conservative tack.
Liberalism has not been abandoned, but a dash of populism and Hungarian patriotism has been added to the brew: "While we wish to feel at home in NATO and the EU," Orban declared at a rapturous FIDESZ congress on June 6the, "we do not wish our good feelings about our home here to fade".
<P>
Years of opposition politics have turned Orban and his allies from young idealists into practical politicians nearing middle age.
That practicality will be sorely tested if they are to succeed.
One problem Orban faces will emerge, not from his opponents, but from within his own party ranks.
The fact that FIDESZ has increased its number of parliamentarians from 20 before the election to 129 now means that many members have never been subjected to the party whip.
Moreover, a large number of these new FIDESZ MPs were formerly members of other parties, collapsed right wing parties, not so long ago.
<P>
Disciplining these new MPs will be difficult, not impossible.
Orban will have to keep them in line while at the same time working in coalition with a number of other parties, including the Smallholders, with whom FIDESZ has serious policy disagreements.
The open problem is whether the Smallholders will or will not join Orban’s government.
Trying to reach over the head of the flamboyant and unpredictable leader of the Smallholders, Jozsef Torgyan, Orban recently lavished praise on the "wisdom, loyalty and importance of the agrarian population," the core of Smallholder support.
This bid to get round the erratic Torgyan may work as Orban does "connect" with rural Hungary, as that is where his roots are, and other Smallholder parliamentarians are anxious for ministerial posts.
<P>
Orban knows that he is taking over a country in which the economy is not in bad shape and social peace prevails, so his policies here will probably be little different than those of the postcommunists.
What Hungary most needs is a substantial reform of a government system that has changed very little since communism’s end.
Bureaucrats and the communist way of bureaucratic governance remains.
Reform of government, Orban believes, is the precondition for a real civil society to flourish.
It may also prove to be a winning political formula for a population fed-up with a bloated and inefficient state machine.
<P>
Succeed in this and FIDESZ could become the counterbalance Hungary needs to the still large postcommunist MSZP.
Hungary could then really be a "normal" European country, with two parties alternating in power and fighting for the center in political life.
FIDESZ’s victory has drawn the day nearer when the Hungarian political pendulum can swing and democracy still flourish.
