<HEADLINE>
Talking Sensibly About the Euro
<P>
ROME: Another week, another crisis for the euro.
This time it is the chairman of the European Central Bank who is under fire.
No matter what causes any one crisis, it is now necessary to discuss the euro’s fate without doomsday overtones.
Five points must be emphasized:
<P>
• The Europe of the eleven euro members is a much more closed economic system than any of its individual member countries.
Most of the commercial and financial activities of the eleven takes place within the euro area.
Hence, movements in the euro’s exchange rate for any single member country of the Euro-11 are much less important, from the standpoint of both benefits and disadvantages, than movements in currencies outside the euro area are to those countries.
<P>
The euro area, indeed, is only slightly more open to outside forces than the United States.
The ratio of exports to GDP in the euro area, for example, is about 17%, as opposed to 12% in the US.
The average American doesn’t care much about the dollar’s external value, yet the value of the euro seems a question of life and death for Europeans.
<P>
• The statute of the European Central Bank declares its objective to be maintenance of stable and low inflation in the middle run.
Stabilizing the euro’s exchange rate is not the ECB’s mission.
Those who criticize the ECB for not intervening more vigorously in capital markets in defense of the euro either have not read the Maastricht Treaty or have forgotten what it says.
<P>
Moreover, if the ECB raised interest rates in order to defend the euro, even assuming such intervention might actually work, the ECB would be accused of stifling growth.
The ECB can influence capital markets only if it coordinates its intervention with America’s Federal Reserve.
In sum: the ECB is doing its job well as prescribed by its charter; it also serves as a scapegoat for politicians, which isn’t in the charter but is something politicians intended all along.
<P>
• A low euro, in relation to the dollar, has both pros and cons, and it is not clear that the latter are stronger than the former.
Inflation remains low in Europe.
Europe’s mini recovery is – in part – due to the euro’s devaluation.
<P>
A strong yen, we should remember, is associated with a strong Japanese economy.
Likewise, for a relatively large and closed economic system such as Europe, a weak euro provides moderate positive effects on growth and some moderate negative effects in terms of threatening inflation.
Both benefits and demerits, however, are much weaker than in countries that remain outside the euro area.
<P>
• Let’s be clear: no economist can reliably explain short-term movements in exchange rates.
(If someone did know the cause or causes of such movements, they would probably keep it a secret so as to make a bundle in the market!)
Thus, the various “theories” on why the euro lost value are speculative.
When economists don’t know how to explain something, they often invoke the irrationality of markets.
This has two great advantages: it is difficult to test (so proponents of it cannot be easily contradicted) and it permits the economist to watch the “irrational” workings of the market with an air of detached conceit, without having to force himself to understand it.
<P>
• European politicians often say that the euro lost value because of the euro zone’s lack of political union.
This is another theory that cannot be tested or verified and, in any case, the logic behind it is muddled.
<P>
This theory is also dangerous for the stability of the euro.
Political union in Europe (even assuming that we understand what is meant by it) will not take place within a matter of weeks or months.
Even among those inside the euro area, not all subscribe to the idea of a federal Europe.
So if the euro is losing value because political union is lacking, it follows that we should expect a low euro for a long time.
Indeed, the value of the euro would be tied to an event difficult to predict and equally difficult to define.
I leave it to readers to draw the consequences with respect to how an agent of an (irrational?) market should act given the fact that participation in the euro and political union was probably the principal motive for the Denmark’s “No” to euro membership and Britain’s reluctance.
