<HEADLINE>
The Role Of Social Policy In Democratic Societies
<P>
Germany is undertaking its most wrenching reappraisal ever of its social welfare policies.
Dr. Kurt Biedenkopf, minister-president of Saxony, looks at the causes.
<P>
DRESDEN: The issue of social policy is very much alive today in the post communist democracies.
Because living standards and inequality were low under socialism, an individual had in a way little to lose.
On top of this, the state delivered an extensive system of benefits.
As the regime changed, the supply of desirable goods increased conspicuously and growing income disparities made individuals realize that their social position was insecure.
The cost of social services also came to constitute a heavy burden on state budgets, and the impact of high income transfers on the economy had to be considered.
As the new democracies re-think their approach and look to the more advanced European models, it is important to ask what lessons they can draw from countries such as Germany, which have many more years of experience.
<P>
Germany is a very rich country and its social system looks enviable from the perspective of those who must anxiously struggle for the necessities of daily life.
But there are also some disquieting lessons as well.
<P>
What makes the German "social state" more and more disputable is it’s expansion over the years that now reaches far beyond those who really need social protection.
There is overall consensus in Germany that people without their own means of survival and without families or smaller local communities upon which to lean in hard times must be helped by the state.
But nowadays, the social system is donating too large amounts to the middle class, rather than the poor.
The middle class now makes up about 80% of the cost.
We are talking about a system that has expanded to roughly 90% of the German population and that itself employs over 250,000 people.
It is a tremendously expensive scheme with a troublesome impact on smaller communities and individual incentives.
<P>
Why do we have such an overgrown system?
In societies in which individualism and competitiveness enjoy high esteem, there should theoretically be acceptance of the consequences of this individualism on the capacities of any individual to care for himself - either in the framework of the family or within other small communities.
However, things turned out differently.
In the old days, the small communities provided a degree of mutual protection for their members and gave them a sense of security.
But as individualism reached a very high degree of dominance, non-governmental social systems have fallen into atrophy.
In their mobility and individual freedom, people are increasingly unwilling to share social and family risks.
They tend to expect the state to take care.
It is not that people shun connections to others, it is just that they do not want to be tied in, or tied down, by them: 50% of households in Frankfurt today are composed of single people.
<P>
People may revel in their individualism, but their anxieties grow as the private world becomes more atomized.
Because of the corrosive effect of individualism and competition, substitute means for delivering security have been developed.
And ironically, almost everywhere the chosen substitute is a social system organized by the state and financed by taxes or mandatory contributions.
<P>
A direct relationship is at work here.
People react to alienation from family and community - their social deficit - by turning more robustly to the state for security.
The higher the degree of individualism, the more emphatic and isolating the social deficit and the more people look to the state for the repose private life cannot provide.
In this vulnerability, there is a temptation to accept a continuous expansion of the social system.
<P>
Against this background, political and other social groups have developed a vested interest in responding to the insecurities generated by our individualistic society.
The social system has become the most important domestic policy instrument of political power, and we have in Germany a seemingly unbreakable coalition among those who gain from its continuation.
Not only are large parts of the main political parties in this coalition, but also management and labor.
They all agree that their functions are indispensable for the system.
And they all fight every change in the system that may make their function less indispensable.
<P>
Does the population really want the system to continue?
We have no way of knowing because the system lacks transparency and the costs of social policy remain hidden to those who pay for them.
This is true almost everywhere in the capitalist world.
In Germany social security contributions are evenly divided between workers and employers.
In reality, of course, the employer’s payment also has to be taken from the workers productivity.
For ten years I have been trying to get German employers to report to their employees at the end of the year what they had paid for them in total.
But German labor unions argue that this would destroy solidarity among workers.
This means that they realize that the burden is too high and that if the workers know what they are really paying they might refuse to continue.
<P>
Lack of transparency creates ever more dependence on the side of those who contribute.
If, after being told the real cost, the people still want all the benefits rather than save money and build up their own share of social security, they can have them.
But in the absence of such knowledge, social policies grow irresponsibly until their cost becomes flatly unsustainable.
The danger is that, without transparency, the erosion people now sense in their private lives will be followed by a silent erosion of the legitimacy of the social policy as well.
Employers and employees increasingly avoid high contributions by moving into the shadow economy or falsely registering workers as self-employed.
This free-riding only adds to the cost for those who still pay and undermines their faith in the system.
Once confidence in social policy is called into question, it will be very hard to reestablish its legitimacy.
With the legitimacy of the social system, the coherence of the civil society would be in danger.
Nobody can wish or accept that.
