<HEADLINE>
The World Economy In 1996
<P>
CAMBRIDGE: The end of decades of inflation and the onset of major long term fiscal restraints are the most striking features of the world economy today.
How central banks respond to this is the key question.
If they fail to ease monetary policy, deflation is around the corner.
If they act promptly, prosperity can last.
<P>
In the US three questions arise: For almost 15 years, inflation has averaged less than 4 percent and much less than that in the past 4 years.
So, is inflation dead?
There is no consensus, but the group of inflation fear mongers is shrinking.
In a setting of moderate world growth and a dollar unlikely to weaken, commodity prices will behave well.
Labor markets are cool, or at least, certainly not hot.
So where is the risk for the Fed in increasing the money supply?
The second issue is the budget.
There is a huge amount of confrontation on stage.
But, as in all bad operettas, the play is unconvincing.
The fact is that major budget cutting will happen over the next decade.
That is what voters want, that is the fashion, that is what looming social security deficits require.
<P>
The third major US economic issue is the consumer.
The US has emerged from an investment-led boom; the next round -- to continue good growth -- requires a sturdy consumer.
That is hard when debt levels have increased, jobs are unstable, and the middle class is frightened.
This is the setting in which decisive rate cuts by the Fed are essential.
Real interest rates today are high, more so if we look at the prospect of fiscal restraint.
Short rates must come down a full percentage point in the next year to keep growth at 2.5 to 3 percent.
Long rates must stay lown and come down further.
Small does of rate cuts are best.
To succeed, there is no better time to start than now.
<P>
Europe is in trouble; massive fiscal problems force fiscal restraint; overpricing of the DM and the Franc spell growth troubles; central banks are late in cutting rates.
Europe may just barely escape from a growth recession in 1996.
Inflation is no issue in Germany, no issue in France.
But the cursed EMU prospect -- a waste of time, a waste of energy, a terrible mistake that much is clear today -- forces everybody to put on a demanding show in the monetary stage.
But economies need cheap money (that is a quintessentially erroneous Anglo-Saxon concept as viewed from the continent).
Belatedly, the Bundesbank has made a start.
More must follow.
Just 50 basis points won't be enough to break a cycle of slack demand, lack of competitiveness, and restraint.
In France the problems are worse: combat on soical rights that can no longer be afforded has spilled onto the streets.
Unions are teaching the government a lesson and the government backs down.
If that happens, EMU may crash too.
That, it turns out, is the only way to really get to the Bundesbank.
<P>
Japan has no good news.
Dragging their feet, the incompetent people at the Ministry of Finance and the Central Bank have finally gotten interest rates down to zero.
It has taken an eternity to get there and in the process the damage has grown.
It will take time to get out of trouble.
The Yen won't help--it will hang around 100 to $1 and no better.
Curing the banking system will also take time.
In a world of fiscal problems and massive restructuring, business will be weakened.
Japan is gone as an economic superpower.
<P>
Asia continues to grow.
But there is little question that Asian real exchange rates are in for a major real appreciation.
Part of the solution to Japan's problem is surely a 20 or 30 percent real appreciation of currencies such as the won.
Just when that happens is hard to judge, but 1996-1997 may be the time.
Beyond that, Asia's top question is China: will Hong Kong go over quietly, will Taiwan stay independent?
There is absolutely no reason to assume the answer to these questions is yes.
Nobody can or will contain China, there is just too much eagerness to have the business.
That opens the way for big surprises.
<P>
Latin America has more good news to offer.
Mexico is probably past the bottom of its crash, but uncertainties on the political front are gigantic and super high real interest rates spell pervasive bankrupticies of companies and banks.
The good news is Argentina on the way to being the next Chile, following deep structural reform, shrinking the state and financial rebuilding.
Brazil is taking its sweet time to make it: fiscal reform is stalled, financial restructuring is overdue, privatization is slow.
In the meantime, real interest rates are sky high.
In any other country one would predict crisis.
In Brazil, be cautious.
A year is a long time to make amends and just get by as Brazil has done so often.
<P>
Looking to the greatest uncertainty for 1996 we turn to Russia.
Elections for the Duma and, in 1996 for the President, give Russia a chance to show its true colors: are we looking at populism, nationalism, retread communism, western reformism or a blend of all with unforecastabel results?
Russia itself has no idea what it wants.
It has no identity, just as in the early 20th century.
It does not know whether socialism, or authoritarian repression feel best.
