<HEADLINE>
The Curse of Ceausescu
<P>
BUCHAREST: For eight years, as one year ends and a new one begins, the political temperature rises here.
Even foreigners only dimly aware of the country’s politics take note.
People call it "Ceausescu’s curse."
This year, however, the "curse" took on a face and a name: Dan Voinea.
<P>
On December 25, 1989 Major Dan Voinea acted as lead military prosecutor at the hurried "trial" of Nicolae Ceausescu and his wife, demanding at its close the death penalty for both.
The two were shot only a few minutes later.
Voinea accused the couple of the "genocide" of 60,000 people.
As investigations later discovered, that figure was inflated.
But such hype seems in keeping with the trial itself.
Recorded on video, to view it now is to see a Stalinist show-trial, the last one (let's hope!) in Eastern Europe.
<P>
The faces gathered alongside Voinea in that fateful courtroom continue to haunt Romanian life.
Supposedly steeped in remorse, the military judge later committed suicide; General Atanase Stanculescu, who only a few days before the trial had ordered troops to open fire on street demonstrators in Timisoara, was named Minister of Defense not long after sentence was pronounced; Virgil Magureanu became the powerful head of the Romanian Intelligence Service.
All were assigned their courtroom roles by Ion Iliescu, president of the National Salvation Front.
<P>
Why did trial and sentence proceed in a rush?
That unanswered question remains at the heart of Romanian politics.
At the time, the new regime claimed it was threatened by mysterious "terrorists" who were keeping Bucharest under siege.
With the tyrant’s death, shooting in the streets did indeed stop.
But since then, however, no "terrorist" has ever been judged guilty in a court of law.
And no one can explain why more people – civilians and soldiers alike – died after Ceausescu tried to flee for his life than during the dictator’s final chaotic days of rule.
<P>
Today, Dan Voinea holds the rank of brigadier general and is Romania’s chief military prosecutor.
As the ides of December rolled around late last year, Voinea revisited his finest hour, indicting a former prosecutorial comrade from the Ceausescu trial.
General Stanculescu (now a prosperous businessman) was alleged to have ordered the military to shoot civilians in Timisoara on December 17, 1989.
More ominously, Voinea committed himself to uncovering the truth of the "terrorists" who had killed so many that December.
It was even hinted that Ion Iliescu, leader of the revolutionary Government of 1989 and president of Romania until his defeat in the elections of 1996, might even be subpoenaed and charged.
<P>
Without presenting any facts, Voinea suggested that the former president might have engaged directly in arranging the "terrorist affair."
The opposition, now led by Iliescu, was outraged.
He charged that the Government wanted to prosecute opposition leaders to divert attention from its own economic and diplomatic failures.
Is a new show-trial in the offing?
<P>
Much of the public believes that Iliescu did play a dubious role in the Ceausescu regime’s endgame.
While in office, indeed, Iliescu did almost nothing to clear himself of charges that he incited the December 1989 streetfighting so as to vest his rule with legitimacy.
Important files were hidden away, no "terrorist" was ever charged, let alone convicted.
Instead, Iliescu’s regime created a rhetorical cult of the Revolution’s "martyrs and heroes," granting exorbitant privileges and tax-exemptions to the so-called "revolutionaries" in order to placate their lingering resentments.
<P>
Here, it seems, the past is never over; it isn’t even passed.
Where the rest of Central Europe appears to have put history aside to get on with the business of starting new businesses, Romania lurches toward forbidden communist-era truths.
Was there really a revolution, or was December 1989 just a coup perpetrated by the nomenklatura?
Apart from Ceausescu, who was directly responsible for the massacres in Timisoara and Bucharest?
Who, precisely, were the terrorists and how did they vanish without a trace?
<P>
Moreover, there are number of so-called "legitimacy" questions: who "inherited" the Revolution’s mantle, if revolution there was?
Those who took to the streets?
Iliescu’s National Salvation Front?
The army and Securitate forces that joined with the people at the deciding moment?
Almost every one in the country has an idea about the "events" of 1989, and almost every political association lays claim to the Revolution’s legacy, dismissing the claims of all others.
Today’s government and opposition, indeed, ritually denounce each other as traitors to the Revolution.
<P>
In the weeks that have passed since Voinea’s dramatic reopening of old wounds, more and more people have come to think that Romania cannot afford to continue wallowing in this dispute.
After all, the economy remains a basket case.
Prices rise almost daily (though inflation is noticeably slower than under Iliescu).
Privatization, under a government supposedly committed to it, proceeds haphazardly; prospects for improved living standards appear slight.
More worrying are scandals within the governing coalition.
There is a nagging suspicion that Prime Minister Ciorbea cannot hold his team together.
<P>
So, is refighting the past worthwhile?
Of course, one must lament and honor those who died eight years ago.
Politics, however, owes its debts to the living.
Rummaging about in courtrooms and secret files is a waste of energy if it deflects attention from carrying out needed reforms, from developing democratic institutions, from preparing for admission one day to NATO and the EU.
Justice may or may not be delivered to the victims if new trials take place, but in any case, would such "justice" be wise politics?
Unlike the ancient god Janus, Romania cannot look backward and forwards all at once.
<P>
In facing the challenges of modernization and European integration Romania, sadly, cannot afford to track down her dark, yet essential, historical truths.
Here, it seems, is Ceausescu’s true curse: we are condemned, not to repeat history, but to forget it.
