<HEADLINE>
The Ugly Face of Solidarity
<P>
WARSAW: In Poland and other East European countries, political power is shifting into the hands of right or center/right governments.
After a period of rule by supposed ex-communists, this swing is not surprising.
The return or debut of a civilized right in the region may even be viewed as hopeful.
But in reality, the right-wing ideologies that are emerging with these "new right" governments are potentially dangerous.
<P>
There are two ideologies of the "new" postcommunist right.
Best known is a combination of nationalism, xenophobia, and religious zeal, which in Poland can be found, say, in the popular anti-Semitic homilies and radio broadcasts of Fathers Rydzyk and Jankowski.
But these rants are really just a nostalgic form of the 19th’s century mix of nationalism and populism.
So long as a free market economy exists and modernization proceeds, such an ideological muddle appeals to those who have lost out or think that they have lost out during the transition.
This group is, however, a minority that, as the benefits of growth spread, will become smaller and smaller.
<P>
The second ideology of the new right is more interesting and more dangerous.
It is a heady mix of radical conservative ideas and criticism of rationalist thinking.
Of course, most conservative thought contains some anti-rationalist tendencies.
From Edmund Burke to Michael Oakeshott the flaws of rationalism were quite obvious.
Their critiques of the French Revolution, of the Enlightenment’s excesses, were aimed at the belief that reason is the true source of all social and political change.
<P>
Today’s new right intellectuals of Mitteleuropa carry on in that vein, believing that reason is responsible for all the miseries and stupidities committed in the 20th century.
Reason is especially responsible for the excesses of something they call "postmodernism," a label undoubtedly negative, though never quite defined or made comprehensible.
<P>
This criticism of every type and every use of rationalism leads, almost inexorably, to a rejection of the ideas of the Enlightenment.
But those ideas are at the very foundation of our civilization -- and of its discontents.
The idea of education, for example, has dominated not only teaching in schools and universities but is at the heart of our democratic system.
Universal suffrage, indeed, assumes that voters are educated enough to know why they cast their ballots as they do.
<P>
Today that basic idea is under attack by the "new right" not only because the communist system embodied the excesses of rationalism, but also because these new rightists think that modernity’s moral squalor arises out of the domination of rationalist thinking.
Rationalism, in their eyes, produced liberalism, relativism, a break in the thread of tradition, destruction of the family, pornography, homosexual displays, promiscuity (sexual and many others), a debasement of arts and letters through moral bankruptcy.
<P>
Toward what goals, to what vision of the future, does this new right push?
One goal is obvious.
The "new right" is for Europe but somehow against the West.
For it, Europe means a spiritual body of values, traditions, customs and religious faith.
The West, however, is a motley collection of destructive materialism containing everything from McDonald's to condoms, from Jacques Derrida to Antonio Banderas.
<P>
Here Europe has nothing to do with the EU or NATO.
Membership in both bodies is not really questioned by this new right.
Instead, its political beliefs amount to a kind of modernization without modernity.
Changes in the economy, industry, the banking system; acquiring new highways, better phones, or access to the Internet are all fine things, but they must not be accompanied by changes in values, by rampant individualism, or by new customs and new ways of life.
<P>
The once overused idea of the "global village" applies here in a perverted sense.
We can use mobile phones and speculate on international financial markets, but we should also live as peasants supposedly do.
We should have many children, respect and care for our parents, go every Sunday to church, be rooted in the soil of our country, and perhaps have a small drink on Saturday night.
We should be primarily collective beings, a communal spirit that has nothing to do with the communitarian ideas of, say, the philosophers Michael Walzer or Charles Taylor, but rather with -- another perverted interpretation -- the tradition of the "Solidarity" movement that challenged and toppled Polish communism.
<P>
"Solidarity"was a social movement of liberation, a wondrous but temporary union of individuals, perhaps even of souls.
But revolutionary social movements cannot last, nor should they.
They cannot constitute a model for "normal" social life.
Nostalgia for the lost unity and fervor of Solidarity is understandable, but nostalgia does not constitute a viable foundation for a new society.
<P>
The new, intellectual right is dangerous in Poland and throughout Eastern Europe because it thrives on the illusion that we can build the economy and civilization of the West without importing the social freedoms that are inevitable and inescapable parts of that civilization.
The new right wants to move forward by marching backwards.
An artificial, ersatz solidarity, however, can only be a construct of our dreams, or of the state’s power to coerce.
