<HEADLINE>
The Causes and Cures of Corruption
<P>
CHICAGO: In recent years, allegations about corrupt public officials have toppled or greatly weakened governments in many nations, and diminished public support for the transition from communism in many parts of the former Soviet empire.
There is no sure fire way to eliminate corrupt behavior, but certain steps would certainly reduce the temptations.
<P>
Elected and appointed government officials sometimes betray the public trust when they deal with companies and unions through regulation of business activities and labor markets, and government purchase and sale of goods and services.
Temptations arise because these transactions often greatly exceed the salaries of government employees.
Extensive and continuing scandals in Mexico, Colombia, Cuba, Panama, and parts of Asia are related to payoffs from drug cartels and other distributors of illegal drugs.
But most instances of corrupt actions involve bribes or other illicit payoffs to officials to obtain government contracts, for laws to be passed that keep out competition, for loans on favorable terms, or to ease the enforcement of pollution and other costly regulations.
<P>
With inefficient government regulations and extensive government management of banks and other enterprises, corrupt officials may unknowingly serve a useful function by reducing arbitrary public decisions, and by helping business people and others get around harmful legislation and regulations.
But widespread corruption of officials leads to a mistrust of all government officials, and discourages honest and able persons from working for the government.
It also directs the energy of talented entrepreneurs toward gaining access to government power instead of engaging in directly productive activities.
<P>
The only way to reduce corruption permanently is to drastically cut back government's role in the economy.
High priority should go to eliminating the thousands of petty, nuisance regulations and laws on the books in most countries which do more harm than good, and that also encourage bribery and other efforts to unfairly influence government officials.
Corruption scandals have in fact strengthened the deregulation movements in both South Korea and Japan.
<P>
Unfortunately, in the short run it is seldom politically feasible to reduce significantly the number and effect of undesirable laws and regulations.
However, less drastic reforms are possible that would reduce the incidence of corruption.
Government officials are, in general, badly paid, especially in Latin America and Africa.
Even in Europe and the United States, officials in the higher level jobs usually earn much less than persons with comparable skills and responsibilities in the private sector.
In all nations, many government officials are highly dedicated and absolutely honest, but low pay does attract into government service some rotten apples who are willing to raise their incomes by accepting bribes and engaging in other corrupt practices.
Even some honest officials may become disillusioned, and surrender to the many temptations to use illegal means so as to raise their incomes to levels they deem more appropriate to their responsibilities and training.
<P>
Many years ago, the late economist George Stigler, and I published an article that proposed a way to reduce malfeasance among government employees.
We suggested, among other things, that officials in vulnerable and important posts receive higher instead of lower salaries than comparable workers get in the private sector.
A significant earnings premium would reduce malfeasance by imposing a potentially large economic cost on corrupt behavior.
For officials who lose their jobs because they are discovered to have accepted bribes or other illicit payments would then be automatically punished by having to forfeit their earnings advantage.
<P>
Apparently, magistrates in the imperial China of centuries ago were paid an extra allowance so as to "nourish their honesty".
Both Singapore and Hong Kong carry on this ancient oriental tradition nowadays by paying public officials well in order to discourage malfeasance.
These economies have not only grown rapidly, but they rank very well in international comparisons of the prevalence of corrupt practices.
<P>
Although neither Singapore nor Hong Kong are democracies, contested elections and democracy often help reduce malfeasance because voters can turn corrupt administrations out of office.
Sometimes totalitarian administrations appear to have little corruption only because a controlled press and the single political party make little effort to discover and publicize the malfeasance of government officials.
In countries like South Korea, corruption did not surface as a political issue until they allowed a free press and contested elections.
<P>
During the past couple of decades, dramatic instances of corruption helped defeat influential politicians in the United States, Spain, Italy, Mexico, Ecuador, and Japan.
It is no accident that in all these nations opposition parties were able to ride corruption charges against the parties in power to impressive victories.
Corruption of public officials is an inevitable by-product of big government.
But public officials are less likely to succumb to illegal inducements if they are paid well, and in proportion to their responsibilities and opportunities for malfeasance.
