<HEADLINE>
The End Of The Korean Miracle?
<P>
SEOUL: The Korean government has been the economy’s baby-sitter for far too long.
In the past, hand-in-glove cooperation between authoritarian governments and the chaebols was a powerful way to mobilize and allocate resources, even though many now doubt the benefits of that proposition.
It is a fact, however, that today the model is gone: government and the chaebols are at odds, the planned and directed capitalist economy is an anachronism.
So there is an urgent need to build a new model.
Just what that model must be is not in question -- an open market economy that self-generates competition and innovation.
<P>
But nothing so poisons the atmosphere for fundamental reform as past success.
Until recently, South Korean leaders could boast of their economic miracle and could trace this to the country's system of economic management by bureaucracy.
That was then.
Now the miracle has become myth.
Politicians, however, prefer the devil they know.
So junking policies, institutions, and ingrained ways of doing things is doubly hard when the old ways are seen as having secured profound and unprecedented prosperity.
Add to this a widespread sense that South Korea's very national independence was secured by the statism at the core of the country's economic miracle and you have a recipe for political timidity, if not outright paralysis.
<P>
Korea is not alone in hesitating to make this vital transition: Japan is dramatically in need of such change; so, too, are Germany and France.
All shudder at the prospect.
Wherever we see economies flat on their back, economies that were once powerful and now are swept off their feet by stagnation, the same conclusion holds.
In Korea the distress seemingly does not run as deep as, say, in France, but without restructuring and privatization of economic decision-making -- away from government and chaebol bureaucracies -- Korea will come to look just like the sick advanced economies.
<P>
Where should Korea look for a successful example?
Surely Chile, with its decade of 7% growth built on a far lower savings rate than Korea, is one case in point.
And Chile's success indicates that Korea can have it both ways -- more consumption and more growth.
To get there, it must ditch the outmoded economic regime that ruled in the days of the Korean miracle, opting for competition, decentralization, and innovation.
<P>
The biggest mistake the Korean government is likely to make is to believe that international financial liberalization is either helpful or inevitable.
In the context of the country's looming OECD membership there is a price to be paid.
So why is Korea eager to become a member of an organization in which the failed economies of Mexico and Turkey became members years ago?
The mark of a country's success is to be found in its stock market, in direct investment attracted, and in per capita income growth, not in the membership of some rich economies' country club.
<P>
But, of course, Korea will join and pay the price.
Financial opening is a silly dowry to bring to the OECD table, because it means that policymaking will be more complicated, and that short-term capital, rather than long-term investment, will dominate the agenda.
The Korean government failed in creating the right debate.
It dragged its feet on opening rather than questioning -- as the IMF now does-- the principle of overnight finance.
It is not too late to put in place a financial transactions tax which limits the damage that arises from the easy transfer in and out of funds.
That may be controversial and Wall Street won’t like it, but who cares?
Chile used it for its success and still does today; Korea can hardly afford to add short-term money as yet another experiment, even as it copes with fundamental change in moving out of a government and chaebol run economy into free enterprise.
<P>
There is, however, a dimension of financial reform that is positive and urgent at the same time.
The Korean financial system is in utter need of a fundamental clean up.
Balance sheets are marked by years if not decades of state directed lending.
To make the banking system and the financial system more functional, banks need to clean-up their balance sheets.
It will be expensive, but waiting will make it even more so, as the US, Scandinavia, and countless emerging economies learned when they were tardy in undertaking reform.
<P>
The banking system is a key actor in financing and promoting innovation and change.
At present it sits in the middle of the road, stopping all traffic except frivolous speculation.
Financial reform and opening up to competition, including from foreign institutions -- not to be confused with volatile cross-border capital flows that are the sort of financial opening the OECD is demanding -- are a must.
Each takes time and therefore should have started years ago.
The worst situation imaginable is that it is not undertaken with an urgent and deep thoroughness, but that OECD inspired capital account opening does Then widespread bank failures with a dramatic impact on loan activity -- remember how Japan's entire financial system teetered just a few years ago! -- would make the situation even worse.
<P>
South Korea must not look for stop-gap fixes to its malaise -- a little devaluation, a bit easier money.
For the danger is that the government will not, as its critics fear, destroy South Korea's distinctive economy through reformist zeal.
Just the opposite.
The threat is that the government will fail to push any serious reforms at all.
But there is a need for systemic change and the sooner it happens the sooner the country's economic dynamism will be unleashed.
If deep reforms do not happen it will become increasingly harder to muster growth, while bank and corporate balance sheet problems will become larger as the real economy increasingly limps.
