<HEADLINE>
The New Political Divide
<P>
VIENNA: Despite traditional party labels, today’s most important political division is between two de-facto coalitions: call them the party of globalization and the party of territoriality.
One seeks to overcome geographical boundaries, the other to restore them.
To borrow from computer language, these are "virtual" parties, cutting across today’s organized political parties, and which include adherents of both new "parties."
<P>
These two new "parties" emerged from the exhaustion of class politics.
Postwar western politics -- confrontations between social democratic parties supporting the welfare state and Christian Democratic or business oriented parties emphasizing the role of private capital -- effectively ended in the early 1980s.
The old historic Left had lost its ideological purpose by the 1980s-- not because it failed, but because it succeeded.
<P>
Success meant the institutional anchoring of welfare states and policies designed to maintain high employment.
Success implied expansion of such public goods as widespread university education.
It did not mean the attainment of radical equality, but acceptance of Keynesian economics, the pursuit of full employment, the expansion of public education and pensions.
But all the achievements of the postwar era came into question with the inflation, labor militancy, unemployment, and budget deficits of the 1970s.
Dissatisfaction led to repudiation of social-democratic governments, as electorates turned to Thatcher, Reagan, and Helmut Kohl.
Where Socialists did gain power -- in Spain and France -- they conformed to the new anti-inflationary realities.
<P>
Reorienting macroeconomic policy represented only part of the sea change of the 1970s.
Equally profound was the weakening of Marxism.
The collapse of Communism, I believe, was part of the overall exhaustion of socialist politics in both systems.
Communist parties and Marxist intellectuals saw their legitimacy vanish at the same time as social democratic faith waned.
The intellectual critique of Marxism inside and outside the Soviet Bloc, whether by Charter 77 or Solidarity or the New Philosophers in France, accompanied the economic difficulties of state socialism and the Soviet Union's failure to secure military or strategic victories (Angola, Afghanistan, the placement of middle-range rockets in Western Europe despite the protests of the Peace Movement).
These pressures brought to power a Soviet leader willing to adopt reforms whose full extent he hardly envisaged and which eventually led to the downfall of the Communist Party.
<P>
These trends created the new agenda of politics.
For with a vacuum on the Left, what are thoday’s major economic issues?
Most concern the progress of globalization: the alleged movement of industrial jobs from Europe and the U.S. to Latin America and Asia; the pace of migration; the influence of investors from abroad and the closing of factories.
The sense of control over one's home territory and one's life-time horizons (in terms of guaranteed long-term employment and pensions) has sharply weakened.
Until the 1980s the nation state remained an apparently effective arena for economic legislation.
National leaders could influence domestic fiscal and monetary policy and, apparently, bring about jobs or enhance competition.
<P>
National policymakers today seem helpless before the complexity of contemporary issues.
Solutions offered by the EU and its Commission often appear too technical, too insulated from public opinion, too complicated, and too contemptuous of national needs.
Beyond this economic menace, cultural dangers seem to lurk.
Linguistic fragmentation, unfamiliar religious and racial customs, different attitudes toward gender relationships -- all seem to undermine the cozy identity that Europeans and Americans associate with territorial jurisdictions.
These concerns are evident throughout the Western world even as they take specific forms in particular societies.
Hence, the two parties: the one that sees its economic future riding on the great transnational transformations of global capitalism; the other, desperately seeking to reinforce frontiers so as to reunite, once again, imagined identity space with real decision space.
<P>
I do not want to over-simplify.
The party of territoriality, preoccupied by the advance of globalization, is itself divided.
One part seeks to protect the nation state or selected provinces against intrusive forces from without and/or less fortunate claimants from within.
We identify it with the French National Front, the Austrian Freedom Party, the Northern League in Italy, among others.
Other defenders of localism design less xenophobic and more instrumental strategies; they can work with the party of globalization as long as they find subsidies and social protection.
<P>
I do not wish to sentimentalize an older Left whose political/economic orientation was no longer viable, but it does seem to me that New Left enthusiasm for the market leaves a dangerous political void.
On one side, the party of globalization appears a neo-liberal party, straddling the old center, and increasingly confident that the market means progress and wealth and that old jobs will be replaced by new.
It stands for productivity increases, downsizing where necessary, and severing the entitlements of welfare from the compensation of labor.
Market logic confirms its appeal to restless modernization.
It is repelled -- as are most Western intellectuals -- by the xenophobia of the party of territoriality.
<P>
On the other hand, the party of territoriality has real grievances and unites people who face authentic difficulties, whether because of the destruction of tradition or threats to their livelihood.
It is a mistake to write them off as neo-fascists.
It would also be a mistake to take comfort from their relatively minor share of the vote in national contests.
The more serious danger comes from the possible conversion of old leftwing constituencies to territorialist platforms.
There is no effective Left among the globalizers that seems able to design a strategy to compensate these grievances.
Neither does there exist a Left able to design a progressive, and not merely defensive, strategy for the territorialists.
I cannot provide a magic ideological vision to ease the ruptures of globalization.
Still, I am convinced that the costs of the transformation are not simply to be dismissed.
If so, we will pay a high price for our lack of political imagination.
