<HEADLINE>
The Economics of Lonliness
<P>
CAMBRIDGE: In most advanced industrialized countries over the last 25 years, voters have steadily pulled away from politics.
Nowhere is this more visible than in the United States.
According to polls taken in the 1950s and 1960s, 75% of Americans trusted their government to do the right thing, most of the time.
Today, only 20% believe this to be true.
Add low voter-turnout and poorly attended political rallies to the mix and you get a worrying problem for politicians and political scientists.
<P>
Wide scale disengagement from politics, however, is symptomatic of a deeper social estrangement.
Put bluntly, many citizens have disengaged not only from politics, but from the other, non-political spheres of community life.
Organizations that 25 to 30 years ago were a community’s focal point -- churches, say, or the American Red Cross, or labor unions -- lost as much as 60% of their active members and volunteers over the years.
More ominously, time budget studies find that Americans nowadays have fewer conversations with other people, and the number of people who never participate in a social gathering with their neighbors has doubled.
Two thirds of Americans say they do not trust people, compared to just one third a generation ago.
<P>
This general decline of "connectedness" in the United States is more pernicious than just the loss of that warm and cuddly sense of community that many people feel nowadays.
With this atrophy of society comes decline in the performance of institutions and diminished prospects for economic prosperity.
Why?
The aspects of community life associated with "connectedness" are similar in their effect to physical capital (a modern plant) or human capital (up-to-date skills): they allow people to be more productive.
<P>
These attributes of social "connectedness," including high levels of trust, civic engagement, and a widespread commitment to help one another, comprise what political scientists call "social capital."
In all societies it is social capital that lubricates economic and social life; it is social capital that creates a climate of cooperation in which problems -- social, political or economic -- can be tackled and solved.
<P>
Take, for example, the recent immigrants from the countryside who live in neighborhoods surrounding San Jose, Costa Rica amid social disorder and burgeoning crime.
One such neighborhood, however, founded a neighborhood association and agreed to live according to a voluntary "Law of the Greeting," meaning that everyone was supposed to get up five minutes early each morning so as to have the time to say hello to their neighbors.
<P>
This informal norm soon built ties of friendship and mutual solidarity.
Once these were established, agreement on practical steps to fight crime followed relatively easily.
That neighborhood now has earned a reputation for being safer and more pleasant, even though its residents are no more affluent than before.
The key was the voluntary decision of residents to invest a few minutes of their own time in developing their social capital.
<P>
If social capital is so important and desirable, why has it been in decline since the 1960s ?
<P>
Strong evidence points to television as the major, but not the only, culprit.
Americans spend on average 40% of their free time watching television, making TV the "800 pound gorilla of leisure time".
In effect, leisure is so privatized as to be isolating.
Statistically, every hour spent watching television is associated with a diminished incidence of voting, of trusting other people, and of group membership.
<P>
Television explains generational differences toward civic engagement as well.
Americans born between 1910 and 1940 are consistently more civic-minded than those born after this time; they are also the last cohort of people who grew up without television.
Although that "long civic generation" watched television as adults, their civic habits, formed between the ages of 15 and 20, were already established.
<P>
Another powerful factor depressing social capital is the changing structure of the American family.
Higher divorce rates and increasing numbers of people living alone influence civic life because, controlling for other factors, single people are less likely to be trusting and less engaged civically than married people.
<P>
As the last of the pre-WWII civic generation retires, a new generation of much more disengaged Americans is taking their place.
Unless America experiences a dramatic upward boost in civic engagement in the next few years, by 2010 Americans will join, trust and vote even less than they do now.
Not that American civil life is moribund.
Americans are still more connected than in many other countries.
However, compared to their parents and grandparents, they are not doing as well.
<P>
Interestingly, in 1897 the US faced circumstances similar to today.
After decades of wrenching technological and social change, the old ways of connecting, geared to an agricultural society, were inadequate to addressing the problems plaguing America at the century’s turn.
Within two decades, however, a burst of social innovation replenished the stock of social capital.
Virtually all the major civic institutions that endure to this day -- the YWCA, the NAACP (the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People), labor unions, the Boys Scouts, the League of Women Voters and many more -- were created.
These institutions played a big role in reviving American democracy and paving the way for America’s economic performance in the next century.
<P>
Society nowadays is different than in the 1890s; so too, the causes of a stagnant stock of social capital.
The challenge, however, is the same.
Citizens in every country must reinvent the ways in which they connect with each other, and they must make these fit into life as lived in the 1990s, with its television, single parent families, and women in the workplace.
Social innovation is the key to re-engaging and revitalizing communities, as well as revitalizing politics.
