<HEADLINE>
The Big Squeeze
<P>
CAMBRIDGE: Competition is the root of progress -- all economics are built on that notion.
From America to China, throughout the transition economies of Eastern Europe, competition is now the first commandment of economic life.
<P>
But does progress inevitably follow?
In the rhetoric of the political right, competition brings only winners.
In fact, for every winner there are losers.
Market reforms may pave the road to progress, but they incite their own social problems.
For as income distribution deteriorates, the middle class may melt away.
<P>
Look at America.
Its economy is growing and stands near full employment.
Yet median family income is barely above that of 1973.
Between 1950 and 1973, indeed, real median family income doubled.
Since then it has stagnated.
Worse, more people per household are working, yet total family income has not risen.
<P>
Understanding the causes of this trend is critical because it is assumed that the capitalist model -- that progress is widely shared, trickles down, that a rising tide raises all ships -- works.
If such metaphors are wrongheaded, either social policies must play an equalizing role or the model itself will become discredited.
In the US, the first attacks have been on government; the Gingrich revolution is a form of populism that tells people that "their" hard earned money is being wasted.
The next round of fire is likely to question the idea of competition itself.
<P>
Consider now the forces of competition: international trade, deregulation, restructuring, and information.
The broad hypothesis is this: firms face heavy pressure to perform; they "benchmark" their performance on the best in the industry, they look across industries and countries to find the best practice, they are unconstrained in implementing their plans.
This is true not only in industry, for the same happens in government, where efficiency and downsizing are also now the rule.
All of this works to the detriment of the traditional middle class.
<P>
International trade is the best example of competition's impact.
In the past -- 30 years ago in the West, five years ago in transition economies -- most countries were basically closed.
Businesses and government were inward looking, with sales concentrated in home markets.
In the 1980s, by comparison, world trade made powerful inroads.
GATT (General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs) rounds cut tariffs to almost nil; Europe adopted its integrated internal market; extreme currency swings opened up the US.
Most important, Asian economies developed in the image of Japan, becoming high quality, low cost world producers.
<P>
In the most recent wave, following the collapse of communism, 2 billion people joined the competition.
The old Soviet-style economies opened themselves to the world.
China, in the blink of an eye, become a major exporter.
India is following close behind.
Technology and the mobility of capital make it possible to produce entry level goods anywhere.
The spectacular growth of coastal China -- 15% per year for over a decade -- is a reflection of this thrust.
<P>
Unskilled labor is the first put under strain by this new competition.
In the US, hourly manufacturing wages are $15.00; in Taiwan they are $5.00.
What can US workers do that Taiwanese workers, or Polish workers at $1.00 per hour, cannot?
Clearly, highly skilled workers working with high tech machines can dominate.
That is not the case in basic industries like textiles, steel, or even automobiles.
Workers that do not upgrade their skills; factories that fail to upgrade into specialized, quality goods: both are doomed -- in the US to low wages; in Europe to the dole.
<P>
Deregulation is the second force of competition.
New entrants into an industry are the ones raising the heat.
In the past, entry into many industries was restricted.
Take airlines.
Salaries for pilots and cabin attendants were high because of entry restrictions.
Today, particularly in the US, with new competitors, cabin attendants have become mere waiters, rather than high-paid workers.
And pilots are forced to take pay cuts everywhere.
<P>
Restructuring is the next competitive force.
Computers and information technologies take jobs once handled by the people.
Secretaries, for example, are replaced by voice mail and faxes.
Middle managers become redundant as computers take charge of quality control and coordination tasks, design and scheduling.
As computers are often more reliable than people -- they don't take vacations, get sick or strike -- they are seen as having an extra edge.
<P>
There is also restructuring around lower costs.
Cost cutting is due not only to rising productivity, but also by shifting services of jobs to others.
The traditional firm that created good
<P>
jobs was largely autarkic: it produced within a full range of services required for its final products.
Today, firms are mainly assembly factories: they buy imports and intermediate goods around the world and limit themselves to those tasks that require social talents.
Services are bought from outside.
Take the example of company drivers.
Companies once employed high-paid drivers and owned fleets of cars.
Today they call a service.
The cost cutting is high because the service driver works for a basic wage, without benefits, and is in daily competition with other limousine services.
This is just the opposite of the old ways, with unionized drivers working for high wages at big firms.
What is true of drivers is true of most services -- legal, food, secretarial.
Firms hire temporary employees for all needs and occasions.
<P>
Restructuring and trade overlap.
It is recognized that low-skill jobs can be done well in low wage countries.
Automobile parts are a case in point.
Parts used to be made by automakers themselves.
Next they were shifted to outside suppliers who could be squeezed to cut costs.
Then they moved to Mexico and Korea.
Wages for autoparts workers have fallen by 40 percent over the past decade.
<P>
Government, too, is biting the bullet.
In the past, from mail services to armed forces, jobs were protected and overpaid.
Today, outside contractors are performing many tasks and public sector wages fall.
Contracting services in the market is seen as more efficient than employing a large labor force.
Voters incite this process by their desire to pay low taxes.
Information is the next force.
Say something cannot be done and your boss will receive a fax saying it can.
Every business keeps a beady eye on competitors to see how things are being done.
On the Internet, in books, through consultants: keeping up takes no time.
Companies must meet the standards set by low-cost competitors or go bankrupt.
Such reengineering is more than a fad; managers must believe in the process or face a hostile takeover from a firm that does know how to cut costs.
The stock market channels restructuring pressures anonymously in ways that managers cannot resist.
Take the example of Eastern Airlines in the US; cost cutting did not work because of inflexible unions.
A new management was bought in through the market; unions struck; management filed for bankruptcy, sold planes and gates.
Union workers woke up without jobs.
Once such examples are set, other unions fall into line.
<P>
So all the old protections for workers are under remorseless attack.
Labor looses or so it seems.
Competition cuts costs and passes on lower prices to consumers.
Yet in that process good jobs are lost and millions of people thrown back into the labor pool, pushing wages down.
Everywhere today job security is the #1 issue.
No surprise that politicians are picking up the theme -- good jobs at good wages, recreate the past.
The trouble is that no one knows how to do it.
<P>
This phenomenon is global.
In the emerging economies of Latin America the shift from statist, closed economies to wide open trade regimes through mass privatization has led to dramatic rises in productivity, but traditional good jobs have vanished.
In Mexico, trade eliminated the textiles industry and privatization killed off government jobs.
The same is true throughout Eastern Europe.
Traditional socialist firms were vastly over manned.
Transition to a free market and privatization is leading to higher productivity but cuts in employment.
Those who keep their jobs are safer in newly competitive firms, but the others are in trouble.
<P>
Even powerful Japan is not escaping this trend.
The strong yen is sending many companies offshore to Thailand, Indonesia, China.
As they leave, labor becomes redundant, either low wage quasi jobs are found, or early retirement is taken.
Either way, Japan's middle class is hollowing out too.
<P>
Ten Years from Now?
<P>
Is this a one-time only transition, or will such forces rule from now on?
For companies, staying lean takes steady effort.
Moreover, there is an offset.
As traditional jobs disappear, new services areas are springing up to yield high incomes.
In the transition economies, large middle and upper income groups have been created overnight.
China, for example, has a vast coastal middle class that did not exist 10 years ago.
Around the world, musical chairs is being performed as new members enter the middle class and old holders of jobs are pushed down and out.
<P>
The Austrian economist Schumpeter called this creative destruction.
He taught that great leaps forward occur only as tractional structures disintegrate, opening opportunities to a new cast of players.
Everywhere an extraordinary free-for-all is underway, bringing conflict and turmoil to established societies, but also opening opportunities for millions of people, like those in the transition economies, who once lived without prospect.
<P>
So competition cannot be stopped.
Through it, standards of living ultimately rise.
Society may not owe something to people who worked in inefficient industries or held patronage jobs.
But does owe everyone a maximum of opportunity and that comes only with good government and strong education.
Every country will need to face up to this competition.
The focus should be on preparing workers for the next round, beyond restructuring, not fighting old battles for old industries.
In this new round, just opening up, workers have to face the challenge of the best educated, hardest working workers from everywhere in the world, not just next door.
They will set the standard for the middle class of the new century.
