<HEADLINE>
The Vastly Exaggerated News about Nationalism’s Demise
<P>
PARIS: "Patriotism," Samuel Johnson once wrote, "is the last refuge of a scoundrel."
The recent spat between Britain and the European Union over "mad cows" is evidence that nationalism can still provide cover for a variety of petty interests.
But behind this silly season row lies a deeper issue: the renewed vitality of nationalism around the world.
<P>
The nation state, born in 19th century Europe, is not prepared to be confined to the dustbin of history as the 21st century dawns.
France started and stopped its Pacific ocean nuclear tests without consulting anyone.
Across Europe, skepticism about the benefits of the EU are growing as nationalist pressures mount.
Disappointment, indeed, is particularly great among new EU members, prominently Austria.German public opinion balks at renouncing the D-mark in favor of a European currency.
<P>
Europe, however, is not alone in feeling the hot breath of renewed nationalist sentiments.
Everywhere "globalization" affects ideas, mores, and hence, needs.
Subcontracting by manufacturers in the third world gives rise to populist cries that the only way to protect developed country jobs is by backtracking on commitments to free international trade.
<P>
Economic forces are not the only cause for revitalized nationalisms.
Because the real powers that shape daily life so often appear to be beyond their influence, let alone control, citizens everywhere are moved to form, or re-form, smaller communities through which they hope to make their voices heard.
This instinct was a primary motive for the disintegration of the USSR, Yugoslavia, and Czechoslovakia, as well as Chechen and Kurdish separatism, and the resurgence of regionalist and ethnic factions in the last Indian elections.
<P>
One can even see these forces at work in the most placid of countries: Switzerland, where a gap is growing between francophone cantons, favoring entry into EU, and German ones intent on preserving their dominance of the Swiss Confederation; and Canada, which almost came apart at the seams last year when French-speaking Quebec almost voted to split the country in two.
Lacking a sufficient majority in the Cortes, the Spanish right, in order to recover power, had to pay dearly for the support of Catalan nationalists, intent on making another Quebec out of their region - the richest in Spain.
Despite broad autonomy enjoyed by the Basque region in the last fifteen years, Basque militants continue to spill blood.
<P>
Riding the nationalist tiger is a tricky issue for governments everywhere.
The grant of real regional autonomy by President Yeltsin to Russia's constituent republics was not enough to dampen Chechnya's will to independence.
China's rapid burst of economic growth promises to renew ancient regional rivalries.
Throughout Eastern Europe and the NIS diplomatic negotiations to protect the rights of ethnic minorities (Hungarians in Slovakia and Romania, Russians throughout the former USSR) strain relations between states.
<P>
Without speaking of Islamic terrorism which plagued it last year, Paris has encountered serious difficulties in dealing with separatist movements in Corsica, some of which are not hesitant to engage in armed struggle.
It has so far been in vain that left and right wing governments have tried, by force or negotiations, to find a solution: the great majority of the population prefers to remain French, while the various nationalistic "families" are violently opposed, and one no longer really knows which of the successive act of violence are related to political revindications or to the Mafia.
<P>
More complicated still is the job of the British government in Ulster, which now allows the American President to intervene openly in an issue that was once deemed internal.
Northern Irish Protestants, who are the more numerous, want to preserve union with Britain.
Catholics want a unified Ireland.
These warring point of view seem as irreconcilable as those of the Israelis and the Palestinians about Jerusalem.
<P>
Does federalism, despite its spectacular failures in the USSR and former Yugoslavia, provide the best means for reconciling today's global impulses with the aspirations of citizens for a power that is close to them?
This was the solution chosen a few years ago by Belgium, torn by conflicts between the Flemish and the Walloons.
In order to offer a compromise to the separatism of its Northern provinces, reluctant to share their wealth with the "thieves" of Rome and the South, Italy's new government proclaims its intention to let the peninsula evolve in the federal direction.
In Germany, the inhabitants of Brandenburg refused to unite with Berlin, preferring to maintain their independent status within the German federation.
<P>
Federalist formulations of this kind are easier to imagine in countries, like Belgium or Italy, in which national unity, although still relatively recent, is sufficiently well rooted.
But the map of the globe has changed utterly over the past decade, with new nations drawing their boundaries and feeling their way in the world.
Each is likely to be tested.
The hard lessons of Grozny is that messy compromises may in the end prove more stable than clear-cut nationalist solutions.
