<HEADLINE>
The Pope's New Divisions
<P>
WARSAW: Drunken, libertine priests: throughout the ages such images have been stock calumnies against the Catholic Church.
No surprise, then, that Catholic Poland was shocked last week by studies revealing that the number of priests with severe drinking problems is about twice that of the male population.
Something is wrong with the Church, people mutter, but no one is quite sure what.
<P>
Catholicism adrift?
Even in Poland?
Unthinkable just ten years ago.
Across Eastern Europe and the developing world the Church gained enormous, fresh prestige for the role Pope John Paul II was perceived as playing in communism's demise.
Now, like some unemployed Cold War general, the Church appears disoriented by the peaceful transition to democracy.
<P>
Political disputes and political divisions between bishops and priests are blamed as one source of the rot in Poland, but I doubt their importance.
Differences between priests and other priests, and priests and politicians, are deep, but they are powerful everywhere.
Witness the anti-abortion debate in America, the global debate about priestly celibacy or the role of women in the Church, or the ongoing slanging match between the Cardinal of Vienna and one of his subordinate bishops.
<P>
Poland has its peculiarities.
Sowing discord is a group of priests loyal to the schismatic church started by that renegade French archbishop, Marcel Lefebvre, in the 1970s.
This "Movement of St. Joseph", however, is but a fringe group, attracting people who consider even Pope John Paul II too liberal, and who revile the changes initiated by the Second Vatican Council 35 years ago.
Groups like these yearn to establish a distinct national church for Poland, and are among those defiantly planting crosses at Auschwitz.
<P>
So, although such actions make headlines, not least because of the virulent tone of the "Radio Maryja" broadcasts that often accompany them, they are not the cause of the new divisions in the Church, here and abroad.
What is dividing the Church is the return, thanks to the apparently final global triumph of democracy, of an ancient Catholic debate, with inherited moral teachings pitted against a faith supported by reason, the individual's conscience, and the personal pursuit of truth.
<P>
This argument was joined by the Pope in his latest encyclical, "Fides et Ratio" (Faith and Reason).
Startlingly, John Paul II sharpest criticisms were aimed at believers who rely too much on faith and neglect reason.
In Poland, the problem is that a majority of bishops, and perhaps others elsewhere around the world, see reason and philosophy as intellectual luxuries.
They may even, perhaps, be dangerous for average people, who might go astray if they started to think.
<P>
Here, the argument is almost medieval, as when the Bible could not be translated into the vernacular for fear that people would seek God on their own and forget the guidance of the Church hierarchy.
Many Polish bishops almost openly declare to their flock: you are supposed to listen, not think or argue.
Faith is a matter of the heart.
If your behavior is good - ie, you do not drink, beat your wife and, of course, give money to the Church - you are fine.
<P>
Even young men studying for the priesthood receive very weak philosophical training and that is done purposefully.
In a Church that boasts of Saint Thomas Aquinas, such "know-nothingism" seems startling.
Poland's bishops, however, are against anything that may lead to doubt, for which the bishops themselves seem to believe they lack convincing answers.
<P>
Related to this struggle are doubts about modernization and democracy, a tussle bedeviling the Church in much of the world.
In many cases, the Church has reconciled itself to economic modernity; in others it learned to play by democracy's rules.
But there is always something problematic for it in the nonhierarchic, democratic order.
Democracy inspires doubt, indeed, it thrives on questions, and the desire to change things for the better from within is a core democratic value.
For priests and bishops reared on tradition and conformity, these notions appear dangerous.
<P>
Nowhere nowadays can the Church openly belittle democracy.
Still, in Poland, its leaders hedge, preferring to stress the importance of national independence rather than democracy.
After several grave political errors, when the Church got involved in politics in counterproductive ways (the return to power of the postcommunists in 1994 was viewed by many as a direct rebuke to Church highhandedness), bishops now mostly avoid direct political involvement.
But that does not mean they accept democracy or its disciplines.
<P>
There will always be points of contention between the Church and democracy, most importantly concerning the boundary between decisions taken by a majority and those left to natural law, morality, or God.
Poland's bishops refuse to embrace democracy for different reasons.
They fear democracy spreading to within the Church, which is composed of believers who are to be followers, not citizens.
<P>
Moreover, they fear democracy may destroy their key stronghold - the Church's post as the defining element of the national community.
These twin struggles are clearly producing two almost distinct strains of Catholicism in Poland, and seem to be inspiring like divisions elsewhere.
<P>
Fifty years ago, when asked what he thought would be the Vatican's reaction to one of his dictates, Stalin responded with his usual brute cynicism: How many divisions does the Pope have? he asked.
In ending communism in Poland, the Pope showed just how many "divisions" he commands.
Now, in the twilight of his remarkable papacy, Pope John Paul II appears to be presiding over the splintering of those once loyal divisions, and the creation of a bitter divide within the Church of his homeland.
