<HEADLINE>
The Diplomacy Of Blackmail
<P>
WARSAW: If someone asked me to point to a decisive factor that helped build democracy and markets in Eastern Europe, I would jab my finger at western blackmail.
As a word, "blackmail" may be overwrought, but it strips away cant and makes an underlying issue of today's diplomacy clear.
Today's East/West blackmail, however, is of a peculiar sort in that, up to now, it has been accepted willingly by those being blackmailed.
Moreover, this acceptance has worked -- for both sides, and nowadays there seems no easy way out from the practice.
<P>
Who are the blackmailers?
Western governments, the World Bank, the European Union, NATO and, of course, public opinion in the West lead the way.
How does it work?
In 1989 all East European countries decided -- some euphorically, some hesitantly -- that democracy and free markets were the political and economic models to pursue.
The West accepted this decision and promised those who behaved many carrots.
Cleverly (as the West was concerned) the "Stick" in this diplomatic dance would be wielded by the postcommunist countries themselves.
It was, for example, the reforms pursued by Poland's Leszek Balcerowicz (stabilization policies followed in other countries) that stopped inflation and started privatization but with high social costs.
<P>
Diplomatic blackmailing is not confined to the economy.
It influenced regional politics.
One can imagine how political mavericks like former Polish president Lech Walesa may have behaved without oversight from the West.
As the reform process got underway, all leaders in the region knew three fixed things: that formal democratic procedures had to be adhered to; that human rights must be guaranteed and respected; and that anti-liberal economic policies were not acceptable in the new Europe.
Some transition country leaders, of course, were in agreement with these without Western prompting.
Others, say Romania's Ion Iliescu, had (and have) harsher personal or ideological tendencies, but understood that self-limitation was necessary, at least for the present.
<P>
But "stick and carrot" diplomacy depends both on the use of the stick and on the availability of carrots.
Now, the stick has become spongy and the carrots old or rotten.
What produced this undesirable situation?
<P>
Since the onset of reform (1989-1991) two powerful illusions influenced attitudes on both sides of Europe.
Western illusions were largely a product of western political thought: liberal democracy was deemed the obvious and only solution to the problems of restructuring political order in the new democracies.
Not only was nationalism dead, but Francis Fukuyama was right when he declared that history was over and that free market democracy was its endpoint.
For thinkers and politicians that follow the road of the American philosopher John Rawls, democracy consists of and depends upon procedural justice.
Imagined communities, patriotic traditions, religious feelings were either secondary or unreal concerns.
So the "Solidarity" movement in Poland was understood rather in terms of civic protest rather than as a crusade of collective moral action.
<P>
Liberalism, however, was never an unproblematic worldview for even the most westernized East Europeans.
True, liberal philosophers like Friedriech von Hayek or America's neo-conservatives were often among the most popular Western thinkers in Eastern Europe.
But so were many Western communitarians and few people in the West realized that their counterparts in Eastern Europe read Hayek's "spontaneous order" and communitarian ideas of membership in local communities in ways that did not sit well with the model of democratic revolution envisaged by the West.
For most East Europeans, indeed, communal and national ties -- long suppressed by communism and dismissed by the West -- had acquired renewed vitality.
<P>
People in Eastern Europe also labored under an illusion about their relations with the West.
They thought that once they fulfilled the main conditions set by the West, once they became democratic and free market countries, they would immediately be embraced by the Western family.
Now, after years of standing in the waiting room, nothing seems clear.
Understandably, therefore, new questions are being asked: is membership in the West really worth our efforts, are free markets such a good thing for local agriculture, are liberal freedoms really unlimited, should we have, for example, laws against pornography and some mild form of censorship?
<P>
When people begin to ask questions, no matter how stupid, you can be sure that some answers are already held in the mind, but that the person is somewhat afraid to speak them aloud.
In this sense blackmail still retains its power, but its hold is beginning to wane.
We in the East cannot blame only the West.
Blackmail that is based on mutual illusions is bound to fail.
Now we must think about the new, post-blackmail, situation.
<P>
Some countries were never invited to this game of blackmail.
Irredeemable Belarus is one.
More importantly, other countries that did play the game are beginning to walk off the field.
Rumania, Bulgaria, and recently Slovakia have lost their way.
Slovakia is the most dramatic dropout.
Since independence, Slovakia is increasingly left off from the list of candidates to enter the European Union and NATO.
This shunning has immensely helped Slovak prime minister Meciar with his supporters back home.
Increasingly erratic and nationalistic behavior by Meciar makes Europe even less interested in Slovakia.
In a vicious circle, this mounting isolation only strengthens Meciar's domestic hand even more.
<P>
There are two ways out of this box.
First, blackmail can be renewed if the West produces fresh carrots.
Otherwise?
Leave Eastern Europe alone.
The first solution remains feasible but improbable because of the insularity of the EU.
The second option will lead inevitably to something that we in the East know well -- to half authoritarian, half populist regimes.
After half a decade of dithering, the West must make its choice.
