<HEADLINE>
The Year Of Europe
<P>
HAMBURG: History works in leaps and bounds.
After WWII ended, it took a few years before new European structures emerged, but they fell into place between 1948 and 1950.
When the Cold War ended abruptly in 1989, elements of a new order were slow to materialize.
Now, in 1997, they are seeming to come together.
This will be a make-or-break year for Europe.
If it looks more like make than break, it will nevertheless be a close call.
<P>
Chances are strong that NATO and the EU will begin to open themselves to the new democracies in Eastern Europe.
Simultaneously, elements for a new relationship between Russia and NATO are emerging, as well as a new structure for the Atlantic Alliance that assures continuing US involvement through a greater European willingness to shoulder part of the security burden.
And for the EU, depressed under a cloud of Euro-scepticism, 1997 could mean the breakthrough to a confident and enterprising Union by providing its most ambitious project to date -- monetary union and a common currency.
<P>
Deadlines for these steps are all squeezed into the next ten months.
In mid-June, members of the EU plan to sign a new treaty to give greater cohesion to their cooperation, thus making the Union ready for negotiations with those countries that want to join.
These talks are to begin in early 1998.
In July, the heads of the 18 NATO governments will invite Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic to join the Western Alliance, with others to follow.
By then a new division of labor between the US and Europe should be worked out, enhancing European responsibility for low-level conflicts in and around the continent.
To make sure NATO enlargement will not lead to a new European divide, an institutional link between Russia and NATO could be in place.
Finally, 1997 will determine which EU countries qualify for monetary union.
Fiscal and economic performance during the year will provide the basis for that decision, to be taken in early 1998, with monetary union beginning January 1, 1999.
<P>
Each step has uncertainties.
While a summit in Madrid will signal NATO’s opening to the East, it is not clear what steps will follow and when.
Negotiations with the first three aspirants will have to be ratified both by them and by NATO’s’s sixteen parliaments.
Will all agree to extend their security commitment to the new members?
Other member countries could exact concessions; Turkey, a long-standing NATO member of increasing strategic importance has made her consent for opening NATO dependent on herself being admitted to the EU.
<P>
Uncertainties persist over NATO’s relationship with Russia.
The clock is ticking: if the Madrid Summit takes place with an agreement between NATO and Russia for closer consultation and cooperation, enlargement could lead to major irritations in Moscow, possibly to deliberate anti-Western action and pressure on Russia’s neighbors.
That is why Western governments are keen to reach an understanding with President Yeltsin.
Can they do so -- and will Yeltsin be in able to push it through at home?
<P>
Nor is EU enlargement a foregone conclusion.
EU internal structures are far from ready for ten additional members.
At best it is unlikely to be before 2005 that the first East European country will take its seat in Brussels.
<P>
And the central strategic project, European monetary union, remains in doubt.
Which countries will qualify remains to be seen but it is clear that without Germany and France there will be no monetary union.
Both countries face major political and financial difficulties caused by high unemployment and low growth.
Neither can spend its way out of crisis if they want to meet the qualification targets, and public patience with the governments of President Chirac and Chancellor Kohl, both committed to monetary union, is strained.
So this most ambitious project of European integration might still fail.
But the fear of failure becomes the most reliable ally of success.
<P>
Imagine NATO dissuaded from accepting new members: the loss of credibility, the most important asset of any alliance, would be enormous.
Russia would feel emboldened to get her way by threats and nyets.
The countries to Russia’s west could tumble in into protracted turbulence in their domestic politics and external relationships.
The alliance between Europe an America would have lost the chance to define a new role for itself in post-Cold War Europe and be in danger of falling apart.
<P>
Or imagine Russia refusing to respond positively to NATO’s offer of a cooperative relationship: she would be the first to suffer.
It would isolate her from Europe, undermining the international links she has woven over the past decade as well as prospects for successful internal reform.
<P>
If the EU should fail to reform its internal structures and or admit those countries it has promised membership, domestic stability in these countries and the Union’s international standing will be damaged.
The United States, in the past a staunch supporter of European integration, would likely adopt a policy of bilateral special relationships with individual European states.
To the outside world as to its own citizens, the EU would look like a selfish, introspective club.
<P>
And if the commitment to introduce monetary union and a common currency is broken, the backlash could deal a fatal blow to European integration.
But if monetary union succeeds, it will give to the European project the strong foundation it has lacked.
<P>
Here is why 1997 is the year of Europe.
By setting deadlines for these decisions, NATO and EU governments increased the costs of failure and heightened their commitment.
They will need all the courage and commitment they can muster to honor the pledges they have made to the world.
The price of failure is a Europe thrown back on past divisions.
The great prize of success will be a European order of stability, order and cooperation.
That is why 1997 is a make-or-break year.
And that is why, despite all the obstacles, the odds still favor success.
