<HEADLINE>
The Calculus Of Diversity
<P>
LONDON: What is Europe's future: integration or disintegration?
I was invited to address this question at the Central European University in Budapest last month before an audience of 60 newspaper editors from Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.
Naturally, I objected to phrasing.
Are integration and disintegration the only alternatives for Europe?
There are plenty of other false dichotomies: centralisation or decentralisation; uniformity or diversity; rigidity or flexibility.
Or, more dramatically: imperial oppression or national liberation.
<P>
A shocked murmur went round the audience with these words.
East Europeans have been fighting for generations for national liberation -- not only from the USSR, but from the Nazis, Hapsburgs, Ottomans, Kaisers, Tsars, Mongols and the other European empire-builders going back to Charlemagne.
Of course, the European Union is infinitely more benign than any of these earlier efforts to unite Europe.
It is liberal, prosperous, more or less democratic, and peaceful.
But does this imply that people who struggled for centuries for the right to call themselves Hungarians, Latvians or Poles will suddenly think themselves Europeans?
Is this true even of the French and Germans?
<P>
No.
France, Italy and Spain, to say nothing of the Scandinavian countries and Britain fight ruthlessly in the European Union for their national interests.
The Brussels bureaucracy is riddled with national quotas and politicians return from Brussels speaking of victories or defeats like generals returning from a never-ending war.
Even in Germany, where pan-European idealism is universal, the EU is popular because it seems a natural extension of the new Germany's benevolent ideals: an orderly, regulated, federal system of social partnership modeled on the postwar German state.
<P>
Everybody is familiar with the jostling for power in Brussels among west European nations, but as Eastern Europe emerges from economic crisis, its people will begin asserting their national interests over those of the EU.
Already central Europeans are more open in expressing national aspirations and demanding that the EU adjust to suit them, and not just the other way round.
Countries like Poland, where unregulated small businesses are generating nearly all the new jobs and growth, worry about the costs of Brussels regulations.
As they build up their export potential and seek expanding markets, east Europeans become disillusioned with Europe's economic sclerosis.
And in foreign policy, they cannot ignore the contrast between Europe's abject failure to bring peace to Bosnia with America's dramatic success.
<P>
The EU is no longer a beacon of hope to the newly liberated nations.
Now Germany is trying to devise a form of restricted EU membership which would exclude eastern Europe from the common agricultural market in order to protect a handful of Bavarian farmers.
In response, the Poles and Hungarians are gaining the confidence to demand that they will have full EU membership or none at all.
If offered nothing better than the political humiliation and economic constraints of second-class EU membership, perhaps they would prefer to stay out.
<P>
As soon as the issue of EU membership becomes a matter of cost-benefit analysis, rather than historical inevitability, bigger questions follow.
If joining the EU is a matter of economic gains and losses and no longer necessary for national survival, perhaps it is not desirable?
If countries like Poland, the Czech Republic and even tiny Slovenia start to feel that they could survive as independent nations in a peaceful Eurasian continent why should they subsume themselves in a multinational superstate?
Instead of distorting their economies to qualify for second-class EU membership, perhaps they would be better off sheltering under Nato's umbrella and relying on global trading arrangements to seek their fortunes beyond Europe's shores.
<P>
But if the countries of eastern Europe remain outside the core of European integration built around the Franco-German axis, implications for the European project will be vast.
These countries to the east contributed as much to Europe's common culture as Germany or France.
They are certain to grow more rapidly in the coming decades than the core of Europe.
If they find common cause with peripheral countries to the north, west and south of Europe, the result could be a fundamental redistribution of power and influence in Europe.
<P>
How could this happen?
Sweden, Denmark and Britain (as well as Switzerland and Norway which remain outside the EU) are uncomfortable with the Franco-German vision of deep and rapid integration.
They may be joined by Italy, Greece and other Mediterranean countries likely to be excluded from the single currency zone.
Britain may be on the verge of a historic reconsideration of its position in Europe.
With public opinion in Britain and Sweden pressing against further integration with the Franco-German core, a new model of European development may emerge.
<P>
France, Germany and other core countries will probably try for a greater economic and political unification which will, in time, make this region almost indistinguishable from a nation state.
But if a significant group of large and prosperous west European countries, including Britain, Sweden, Italy and Spain remain outside this new federation, there will be less pressure on eastern Europe to accept the costly conditions and restrictions on national sovereignty which joining the Franco-German federation entail.
<P>
With the trading arrangements of the European common market increasingly subsumed by the globalisation of free trade and agriculture under the World Trade Organisation, and with American dominance of Nato providing the only meaningful security guarantee, and with English now irrevocably established as the world's lingua franca, a clear alternative is emerging for the peripheral European countries, both rich and poor.
Instead of joining the highly regulated and integrated Franco-German core of Europe, they can remain part of the flexible, diverse and deregulated periphery to which historically and geographically they have always belonged.
<P>
Countries that want to stand back from full political integration and preserve their national identities need not turn their backs on Europe.
Anyone who has studied the calculus of Newton and Leibnitz knows that disintegration is not the only antonym of integration.
In calculus the opposite of integration is differentiation.
In history, as in mathematics, a proper understanding of both of these processes can be difficult, but is indispensable and enriching.
