<HEADLINE>
Tocqueville Annulled?
<P>
PARIS: French author Alexis de Tocqueville was 30 when he wrote, in 1835, after a long trip to the US, this page of his Democracy in America.
Of all the forecasts the last century devoted to ours it is probably the most accurate and certainly, at least in the West, the most often quoted.
It’s all the more striking since he couldn’t imagine that the Tsarist Empire would someday turn red: Marx was only 17 at the time, and, although it had been advocated by Plato, communism was usually considered an inoffensive dream of a few eccentric intellectuals.
Neither could he foresee the advent of the Nuclear Age, probably the main reason why the Cold War didn’t turn into a hot one.
His analysis was mainly geographical, not to say physical: no other nations had such space, and so many resources, open to its ambitions.
<P>
What remains of this vision, four years after the disappearance of the USSR?
Despite all its worries, shortcomings and setbacks, the United States is in all fields, from military to economy and culture, a superpower.
Does post-communist Russia deserve the same title?
The answer is yes.
It is by far the largest country in the world.
It shares with America the questionable privilege of holding an arsenal large enough to bring the history of mankind to an unquestionable end.
The wreckage of its economy is due to decades of managerial and political absurdities and to the dreadful plight of two World Wars, a Civil War and a Cold War, not to a lack of resources.
Potentially, Russia is a very wealthy nation.
<P>
This nation has managed to retain a permanent seat on the UN Security council, and periodically threatens to use the attached veto right.
It won’t let the “near abroad” countries join NATO.
Russian Foreign minister Andrei Kozyrev has frightened the Baltic Republics when he made clear, early this year, the Kremlin’s claim to protect the Russian minorities outside its borders.
He and Yeltsin would very much like to renew with the old tradition which made the Tsars defenders of the orthodox in the Balkans, to start with, in former Yugoslavia.
<P>
From their stand in Chechnya or in the Kouriles dispute, one can conclude they are definitely not willing to give up any parcel of their wide Empire.
Far from that: at least since the December 1993 election, one can’t fail to notice in their behavior, something very much akin to imperial nostalgia.
Without going as far as General Gratchev who declared, during a visit to Azerbaidjan in March 1994 that CIS is Russia, the fact is that, from Belarus to Georgia and Kyrgystan, Moscow keeps troops in several Republics of this Community of Independent States the members of which are obviously not equally “independent.”
<P>
Does it mean that Tocqueville’s description has survived the turmoil which followed the fall of the Berlin Wall?
That we were wrong to see 1989 as a remake of the Great French Revolution which, two centuries earlier, had brought down the old European order?
No: the differences between the world of the Cold War and ours are too striking to be ignored.
<P>
a) The US and the USSR were enemies, bearers of incompatible creeds and ambitions: it took seventy-one years after the October Revolution for a Soviet leader - i.e. Gorbachev - to speak (before the UN General Assembly) of the “common values of all mankind”.
Until his appointment as secretary general, there had been periods of “detente”, of course, but, at least on Moscow’s side, they were considered as useful breathing spaces.
Today Clinton and Yeltsin are avowed partners, they both believe in democracy and market economy, and don’t forget to put God in their political background.
<P>
b) The Americans no longer feel challenged by a global enemy.
For a time, some thought that “islamic fundamentalism” may be the new threat but it is too divided, its means are too limited to represent for the Americans a threat of the same magnitude as yesterday’s Soviet Union.
For sure, they are eager to defend their worldwide national interests but they are less and less ready to risk their son’s lives or to waste their dollars for the sake of peoples engaged in obscure ethnic or religious struggles.
As historian Arthur Schlesinger Jr. wrote, they are rather tempted to go back to the maternal “womb”.
Nothing remains of the New World Order announced by George Bush after his victory on Saddam Hussein.
<P>
c) Were de Tocqueville alive today, he would certainly add a third nation to his pair: China, with more than one-sixth of mankind, it is now the third economic power in the world.
It has doubled in five years its defense budget, owns intercontinental nuclear missiles and makes no mystery of its intentions to become, at least, a regional superpower.
<P>
d) With a population one tenth the one of China, a territory smaller than France, no mines, no national source of energy, no atomic weapons, no very clear political design, Japan is still well ahead of China in the world economic competition.
It owns the eight largest banks and the Americans would be terribly embarrassed if it stopped buying their bonds to help them to face their huge debt.
Whatever Japan’s present difficulties, this fantastic achievement shows that real power today does not necessarily require space and raw materials.
<P>
e) Does it even require a State?
To the might of yesterday’s trusts and cartels one ought to add nowadays “multinational” companies, the “networks” of all kinds, not to forget the Mafias, and all those groups whose money massively circulates from one market to another: being far less powerful, many governments can’t but yield to their pressure.
<P>
f) What de Tocqueville had in mind was a bi-polar world.
At the time of the crumbing of the Soviet Empire, many were expecting a “unipolar” world, dominated by the US.
What we watch today is a general crisis of the hegemonic system.
History has known a number of them since the fall of Rome.
But this one is more serious, because now we all live in the global village.
The answer to the hegemonic problem lies probably in regional regroupings - no wonder the European Union has such an appeal on the liberated countries of the East.
The more members it will have, unfortunately, the more difficult it will be for it to speak with one voice...
