<HEADLINE>
Transition Countries And The D-Mark - A Marriage O
<P>
FRANKFURT: Investors and central bankers love the D-Mark.
The German currency is second only to the US dollar as a reserve currency: 15% of the world's foreign exchange reserves are in D-Mark (dollar: 57%).
It is also a sought-after investment currency: Non-German investors hold about 20% of domestic German bonds and 1.300 bn in D-Mark assets.
<P>
Eastern Europeans are as fond of the D-Mark.
Their central banks thought to overweigh the D-Mark as a reserve currency.
German banknotes are as popular.
The Bundesbank estimates that around 35% of D-Mark notes are circulating outside Germany, much of it in Eastern Europe.
<P>
Given Germany's size and proximity this is no surprise.
Germany is the most important trading partner for many East European and NIS countries.
The D-Mark's popularity is underpinned by its reputation as a hard currency.
Since the inception of the D-Mark in 1948, German inflation has never averaged more than roughly 3%.
Consequently, foreign investors often find themselves rewarded with exchange rate gains.
<P>
International recognition of the D-Mark is a mixed blessing.
The Bundesbank worries about the consequences of the international use of the D-Mark for its monetary policy and for the exchange rate.
<P>
Here, the D-Mark's role as an anchor currency within the EMS is at stake.
The anchor came into being in the mid-1980s.
At the time most EU countries resorted to pegging their currencies to the D-Mark, in the hope of gaining credibility for their efforts to achieve price stability.
The flip side of this coin was that they became hostages to Bundesbank's monetary policies.
By the same token the Bundesbank found itself in the role of Europe's central bank.
<P>
Taking up this mantle did not come easy.
Stubborn messages are heard that the Bundesbank’s mandate is about the D-Mark's stability, nothing else.
In recent years, a different perception emerged.
The Bundesbank, under its new president, radiates a consciousness of being well aware of the external ramifications of its policies.
<P>
Given the growing use of the D-Mark in Eastern Europe, and therefore the dependence on decisions taken in Frankfurt, the question as to how the Bundesbank handles the D-Mark's role in the East becomes critical.
In one respect the Bundesbank need not worry: The larger the number and the clout of the countries pegging their currencies to the D-Mark, the smaller the impact of the fluctuations of the US dollar exchange rate on the German economy.
Otherwise, there is room for controversy.
<P>
Maybe not for long, though, with the European Monetary Union (EMU) looming on the horizon.
The European currency will take over the functions of the D-Mark.
Given its larger scope, the "Euro" may gain even greater importance than the D-Mark as an international reserve and investment vehicle.
<P>
Assuming that EMU flies, i.e. that the hard core union including Germany, France, the Benelux, Austria and a few more countries - is realized in 1999, Poland, Hungary and Czech Republic will find that nearly half of their exports will be with EMU countries.
Russia, Ukraine, the Baltics and others in Central Asia as oil comes on line, will see a growing portion of their trade going this way.
This will create incentives in Eastern Europe to use the European currency as an anchor for exchange rate policies and foreign reserve holdings.
The Euro will replace the D-Mark and probably the dollar in citizens' wallets.
<P>
But use of hard currencies in transition countries should decrease as national currencies become more stable and convertible.
This will not eliminate the orientation of monetary and exchange rate policies in these countries towards the EMU.
In other words: The future European central bank will have to keep a watchful eye on economic and monetary developments in Eastern Europe.
<P>
On the other hand, should EMU fail, rough sailing is ahead for all European currencies.
The D-Mark would, initially at least, appreciate sharply - with dire consequences for German industry, and for the "pegged" and semi-pegged economies who will find themselves clinging to a rocket.
Further ahead, of course, what goes up must come down.
EMU's failure would begin a rough ride for everybody, not least Eastern Europeans.
