<HEADLINE>
Turn Left, Turn Right
<P>
WARSAW: Electoral fortunes in the transition countries now swing like a pendulum.
Three years ago, there was a sharp tick to the left; now an opposite tick, equally powerful, is pulling to the right.
Lithuania, Bulgaria, Romania and Estonia in their presidential elections: all have seen the right stage surprising comeback victories; Poland and perhaps Hungary may see the right regain parliamentary control next year.
<P>
The surface reasons for this shift are obvious.
People are disappointed that the left has not delivered a gentler yet growing economy.
In the case of Poland, for example, postcommunists delivered rapid growth, but their performance in the fields of social security, health, and other social issues has been nothing short of disastrous.
<P>
Still, there is a kind of normalcy to these electoral shifts.
Governments fail and the people replace them at the ballot box.
In the case of Lithuania, Poland, and possibly Hungary, however, this is already the second turn of the screw: only a few years ago it was the right that was seen as failing so the left was given its chance.
Now the left is deemed a failure and the right returns to power.
What if it is again perceived as a failure?
<P>
Pendulum shifts in the region's politics mask a fundamental failure: people are unable to define their political preferences in a coherent way.
Was the left, for example, really defeated in Lithuania only because of its poor performance?
It is far from obvious that Poland's postcommunists can be deemed as failed overseers of an economy growing faster than any other in Europe.
So, was the postcommunist left undemocratic?
Only Romania's President Iliescu fits that description.
Perhaps corruption was the cause: but no government in the region has been able to avoid that charge.
Moreover, what proof exists that the right will govern more effectively than the left?
Evidence, indeed, exists for the contrary.
After all, Lithuania's first rightist Sajudis government was no paradigm of managerial competence.
<P>
Atavism seems to be a potent force in the politics of the transition.
People are simply fed up with their ruling class, new and old alike.
Yet behind this revulsion there remains some of the hope that brought people into the streets in 1989: a desire for honest, decent, and effective government; a politics with fewer quarrels, accusations, and denunciations; in short, a permanent, velvet revolution in miniature.
In some ways, this is good, because it shows that people in the region still believe in politics.
In other ways, however, this is dangerous; for eventually disappointment will yield a form of antipolitics and its ultimate embodiment, demagogic populism.
Belarus, indeed, already seems to have journeyed into that dark wood.
<P>
Thus the new right governments bear enormous responsibility.
It is an open question whether any of these new governments can undertake the sudden "shock therapy" programs that Poland embarked upon six years ago, and which are the root cause of today's growing economy.
Yet, bold economic reforms remain necessary.
Many of the new right governments, however, now stress national identity and reform couched in a communitarian spirit.
This is a mix that has such obvious intimations from the past that warnings about its potential dangers are unnecessary.
Today, this heady brew has an added ingredient: a growing wariness about the process of westernization, which now seems both too slow and too ugly.
<P>
I am not against the right, far from it.
I am personally rather right of center.
But these recent victories do not leave me hopeful.
My fears are less about programs than about the state of politics itself.
The West nowadays seems to be escaping politics in all its forms; so once more the people in this region appear to be going against the current of the time.
Throughout Europe, America, the entire democratic world, representative democracy is mired in a deep malaise.
But what Poland, Lithuania, Hungary, and others in the region need is precisely a revival of the ideals of representation that are now so often a subject for derision in the West.
Efficiency and economic success are well, good, and necessary; but political involvement and participation are also needed if the transition is to succeed.
But many now ask: why should we build our future on the basis of representative democracy when the very idea of representation seems increasingly ridiculous in our supposed role models, the democracies of the West?
<P>
Is it possible to believe that this turn to the right will have real substance and consequences at a time when ideologically motivated politics seems so discreditied?
Indeed, at a time when political standards appear laughable and ideology is damned as politically incorrect?
For us, however, clear choices still exist between political parties that aspire to power.
The West may think of itself as at the end of history, where all questions of political, social, and economic organization have been answered.
But history is still staring back at us with beady eyes.
Without a politics of ideas, it may be impossible for us to sustain democratic energies, particularly if ideas are replaced by television's groomed showmen or so-called experts.
It may seem naive, but a return to competing ideologies may be the region's best hope.
Is that acceptable in elegant, western society?
