<HEADLINE>
Women And The Postcommunist Transition
<P>
BUDAPEST / VIENNA: Economists are often unconcerned about the social context of their work.
In the transition from communism, many simply failed to ponder the full consequences of their proposals on the poor, the elderly, children, the Roma minority, or women.
<P>
Take the example of women.
In theory, the state and the market are gender-blind: in practice, they are not.
Feminist analysts, such as Patricia Williams, have shown that gender biases are built into society.
That critique was valid for socialist societies, too.
No matter where, elimination of state sponsored gender bias needs deliberate intervention.
Here an irony intrudes: usually prompted by civil movements, removal of such biases only becomes effective when these movements have their goals implemented by direct state action.
<P>
The same applies to the market, which also appears gender-blind.
Left to itself, however, the market is not.
Powerful interests usually prevail.
Mechanisms of correction are also similar.
The 'voice' of citizens, civil discontent and pressure, are sometimes sufficient to curb 'stronger' market forces (victorious strikes are a good example).
More often, only state legislation can enforce the will of citizens; strikes, for example, may be made legal or illegal depending on state regulation.
<P>
In the post-socialist countries the oft-proclaimed gender-equality of state socialism left much to be desired.
One hopes that women will use today’s new political, economic, and social freedoms to redress the old system’s flaws and move forward toward gender emancipation.
So you might expect, then, that alongside other groups, women would begin grassroots movements, initiating a general discourse on gender-relations and "women’s issues", and pressuring politicians to take gender issues seriously.
You would be wrong: gender is seldom on the political agenda, and civil movements for gender emancipation are weak.
<P>
Gender-policy in the former socialist system may be evaluated in many ways.
Alongside its myriad distortions and inadequacies there were nevertheless institutions and regulations that sought to decrease the social disadvantages of women.
Many of these -- from protective labor legislation to long, job-protected, and paid maternity leave, to free or affordable child day-care -- are today at the top of the agenda of many western civil movements.
Granted, socialist era measures had flaws: they were often coercive; elements of "positive" discrimination built into them may have harmed women; the quality and the hidden ideological agenda of child care institutions were dubious.
And, of course, they were expensive and did not conform to any 'market logic'.
<P>
Such flaws, however, should not have been fatal to the life of these programs.
Instead, they should have incited a desire to make the programs more 'democratic' -- meaning more citizen participation, more citizen control, more concern with the emancipatory potential of the measures, and so forth.
Reform along these lines could also have been combined with some cuts in spending, say, trimming the maternity grant or child care allowance, or imposing reasonable fees on those able to pay for them.
Unfortunately, cost-cutting prevailed across the board and across the region, inciting serious consequences for the emancipation of women.
<P>
Take the position of women on the labor market.
Women encounter more difficulties in getting a job (even with equal qualifications) than men because they appear less 'flexible'.
Bosses believe women employees may be absent more frequently due to pregnancy or the illness of a child.
<P>
Labor laws protecting women from such discrimination are nowadays abandoned, weakened, or are disregarded by employers because of the weakness of the postcommunist state.
So women accept unhealthy jobs, long hours, or work-shifts that are hard to adjust to family needs, along with new forms of exploitation and sexual harassment Even when these and other practices are illegal, women do not protest, fearing for their jobs.
When a benefit still exists, like extended child care leave, a decreasing proportion of women use it -- and for shorter times -- because they fear redundancy if they do not return to work quickly.
<P>
Retreat of the state from the social sphere and institutional changes in welfare provision aggravate the situation.
The shrinking of child care services is a case in point.
Without good, affordable day care, work for mothers becomes either extremely difficult, too costly, or impossible.
Market prices for these services are prohibitive even for the better paid, and private insurance rarely handles children because of the dangers of 'moral hazard' and 'adverse selection'.
The consequence?
A decrease in income, and/or increasing poverty for women.
<P>
Similar results occur when family benefits are eroded, as they have been.
Children’s poverty has increased dramatically, usually more than that of the whole population or of pensioners.
Single mothers are among the worst-off groups in the region, particularly in Poland and the former East Germany.
Some of these problems may be handled by targeting assistance or by giving 'vouchers' to the poorest children or to single mothers.
But no amount of targeting can solve the relationship of children and women to the market and to the state, and of women.
<P>
Relying on market mechansims alone cannot solve the problems of women.
Female freedom of choice -- both as consumers and as producers - is remorselessly curtailed.
Traditional economic remedies, like diversification of ownership, increased efficiency, access to basic education or a minimal pension, have scant impact on resolving these problems.
Even 'job-creation', whether by the market or by the state, is insufficient without institutions that enable women to take up a paid job.
<P>
The conclusion is self-evident.
Social and economic policy in the transition countries must certainly be about freedom.
But they must also encompass enforceable rights; they must also create conditions that enable women to achieve equal opportunity.
To meet these goals, the inequalities between genders, minorities, the rich and the poor must be confronted head-on.
The problem is to reconcile these conflicting objectives and values.
State socialism utterly failed to do so.
Are we doomed to fail again?
