<HEADLINE>
Yeltsin’s Asian Dreams Start in Tokyo
<P>
TOKYO: More than financial typhoons are rattling the Pacific.
Emerging changes in the region’s balance-of-power may be of equal long term importance as today’s stock market tumult.
Summit talks between Russia’s president and Japan’s prime minister in early November, for example, produced far richer outcomes than anyone expected.
During long sauna discussions, Boris Yeltsin and Ryutaro Hashimoto agreed to conclude a peace treaty between Russia and Japan by the year 2000, something that has vexed both countries since WWII’s end.
<P>
What is Moscow’s hidden agenda?
Russia now wants to join the Asian power game by improving it’s ties with Tokyo.
But this can not happen unless the issue of four islands, the Kuriles, taken by Stalin in the waning days of WWII is settled.
<P>
Easier said than done.
In 1956, without closing the issue, the two countries agreed to end their state of war.
Nikita Khrushchev, indeed, promised to return two of the four islands if and when a peace treaty was signed.
As America and Japan strengthened their alliance after 1960, peace talks withered.
<P>
Even after communism’s collapse the dispute lingered.
In 1991, as the Cold War wound down, President Gorbachev conceded that there was a territorial problem between the two countries and hinted at a willingness to resolve the matter.
By 1993, however, President Yeltsin was talking tougher: "Let this be settled in the next century, by future generations," he argued in a speech before Oryol University students.
<P>
Impasse keeps the two countries at a distance, one side-effect being the relatively low Japanese investment in postcommunist Russia.
Now President Yeltsin seems to have accelerated his timetable by his promises to Hashimoto in Krasnoyarsk.
The question is why?
<P>
Some speculate that Yeltsin would like to go down in history as the man who solved Russia’s most troublesome territorial dispute.
Perhaps he also believes that Russia’s Far East cannot be developed without Japanese capital and technology.
Such growth is needed east of Irkutsk (where the population is only eight million) because, otherwise, the area may fall into China’s sphere of influence.
Indeed, next door, China’s "Northeast District" (formerly Manchuria) has about 100 million people.
<P>
Many Chinese, indeed, have taken advantage of warmer Sino/Russian relations to cross the border into Russia and set up and settle down as traders.
This worries Russia’s authorities responsible for internal security.
Premier Hashimoto went some way to allaying Russian fears here by promising to assist in improving Siberian railways and other transport systems.
<P>
Hashimoto also proposed an increased level of security cooperation, including the exchange of visits between the Chairman of the Japanese Joint Staff Council and the Russian Joint Chief of Staff.
Some form of joint military exercises, something which Japan and China have not yet contemplated, were also broached.
<P>
The shifts in Yeltsin’s attitude must be seen in the context of Nato’s forthcoming expansion, and the closer security ties between America and Japan forged since April 1996.
Both events pushed Yeltsin into his so-called "strategic partnership" with China, with both partners sharing distrust of America acting the dominant hegemon.
Russia, conveniently, can sell its modern arms to China at reasonable prices.
China is displeased at the stronger Japanese/US alliance.
There is a marriage of convenience here.
<P>
But Yeltsin must suspect that Russia’s Pacific role would be handicapped so long as it remained tied with a China on bad terms with America.
Yeltsin needs fresh ways to expand Russian influence in the region.
Here Japan is the gateway.
Good relations for Tokyo are not just beneficial for developing Siberia, but may lead to membership in Apec (Asia-Pacific Economic forum) .
<P>
Apec’s original intent was to promote economic cooperation and trade liberalization in the region.
Since 1993, however, it has become an occasion for informal multilateral and bilateral summits among the heads of government of some 20 member states.
(The recent Vancouver summit discussions on the region’s financial crisis are a case in point.)
So Apec membership is highly important for status-conscious Russia.
<P>
By somehow reaching agreement on the territorial dispute between Japan and Russia, Yeltsin will move toward developing a strategic partnership with Japan.
Yet Yeltsin knows his realpolitik.
In order not to slight the Chinese, a week after his meetings with Hashimoto, Yeltsin flew to Beijing to stage, however awkwardly, an embrace with President Jiang Zemin, who had also just come back from his trip to the United States.
The Yeltsin/Jian summit was paralled by a visit to Tokyo by Russia’s foreign minister Primakov.
The diplomatic dance continued soon after, with China’s premier Li Peng arriving in Tokyo.
<P>
What is afoot now is the most intense interaction among the region’s four powers anyone has seen in decades.
The old US/China/Japan triangle may be on the way out if Moscow’s ties with Tokyo improve.
This will certainly enhance Russia’s role in a now suddenly volatile region.
The irony is that it seems to have taken a push from the West – ie, Nato expansion – to concentrate the Kremlin’s mind on the East.
